# January 2023 OCapN pre-standardization meeting, 2023-01-31

- **Chair:** Jessica Tallon
- **Scribe:** David Thompson
- **Present:**
  - Alan Karp (alan)
  - Baldur (Zarutian)
  - Christine Lemmer Webber (cwebber)
  - Dale Schumacher
  - David Thompson (dthompson)
  - Edward Platt (edplatt)
  - Ian Denhardt (isd)
  - Jessica Tallon (Jessica)
  - Jonathan Rees (jar286)
  - Kris Kowal (kriskowal)
  - Mark Miller (markm)
  - Mike Stay (Mikestay)
  
# Recording
  The presentation and discussion part of this meeting was recorded, you can find that:
  
  - https://share.tube/w/44DhG6pcEyCFgnUHhxnUTn
  - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQJB6MSmang
  
# Agenda

- Approve meeting minutes from December 2022 meeting (2022-12-06)
- Spritely Goblins' handoff implementation presentation & discussion

# Minutes

cwebber: we're going to be recording this meeting because there are multiple people that cannot attend so they will watch after

cwebber: we are recording

# TOPIC: Approval of last meeting's minutes

Jessica: let's take a vote on approving the previous meeting minutes https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/blob/main/meeting-minutes/2022-12-06.md

Jessica: +1

cwebber: +1

edplatt: +1

Zarutian: +1

isd: +1

alan: +1

**APPROVED**: meeting minutes for 2022-12-06

Jessica: meeting minutes approved.

Jessica: we're waiting on Mark Miller but Kris Kowel from Agoric is now here

cwebber: recording has been stopped and restarted to capture presentation

# TOPIC: Presentation of Spritely Goblins' third party handoff implementation

Jessica: this is the worldview: alice on machine A, bob on machine B, and carol on machine C

Jessica: alice has a reference to bob and carol

Jessica: the goody bag in the diagram is a "gift table" where gifts can be deposited

Jessica: each side of a session has their own gift table

Jessica: connections in the diagram are import and export tables

Jessica: sessions have certain attributes: session id (pubkeys, sorted and hashed), key pair (pub/priv key), import/export table, and gift tble

Jessica: we want to do a "hand off". we are sending a reference to carol to bob.

Jessica: bob does not have a reference to carol so a handoff will occur

Jessica: a gifter is who is giving the handoff (machine a)

Jessica: the receiver is getting the reference (machine b)

Jessica: the exporter is the location of the gift (machine c)

Jessica: the first thing that happens when machine A tries to perfom the hand off to machine B is machine A sends a message: depositing a message in the A-to-C gift table.

Jessica: this is being sent to the bootstrap method on C using the 'deposit-gift method.

Jessica: something worth noting is that A sends it but C might not necessarily receive it

Jessica: this is done first because A needs the gift id

Jessica: the next step is sending a certficate from A to B

Jessica: certificates are represented by a handoff-give objet. it has a recipient key (B's public key in A->B session), exporter location (machine address to C), session (session id for A->C session), gifter side (machine A's pubkey in A->C session), and the gift id

*cwebber: every session in ocapn sets up fresh keys from both sides, for clarity*

Jessica: the handoff-give is wrapped in a sig-envelope with is signed by the A key of the A->C session. this is so C can verify that A actually made this certificate.

*cwebber: "B-key-of-AtoB" is a key made by B specifically for that session*

Jessica: B gets the certificate. the first thing B does is make a promise which will eventually (hopefully) resolve to a reference to carol on C

Jessica: Bob receives the 'say-hello message with a promise that will hopefully resolve but might break

Jessica: if B doesn't yet have a connection to C, it will create one

Jessica: B mades a handoff-receive object based on the certificate

Jessica: B sends that object machine C's bootstrap object

Jessica: handoff-receive has: receiving session (B->C session), receiving side (B's key in B->C session), handoff count (to prevent replay attacks), and signed give (the certificate from earlier)

Jessica: B is adding on extra information to the certificate so the handoff can happen

Jessica: the crucial thing to note is that the signature on the handoff-receive is B in the A->B session

Jessica: we're at the point where C has the handoff-receive. it pulls out the A->C session and gets the gift tables, import/export tables, and keys and starts looking at them.

Jessica: C checks the handoff-give signature. it knows how to do this because it has the signature of A in the A->C session.

Jessica: it can verify that the "A" is the same "A" that C knows.

Jessica: A helpfully included the pubkey for the A->B session

Jessica: C can grab that key and verify that B really is the B that A thinks B is and that B really did send this data

Jessica: C knows that this isn't a malicious message because they wouldn't have the key pair for the A->B session

Jessica: C can now look up the gift id in the A->C session

Jessica: if it doesn't exist, perhaps the A->C connection is slower than B->C.

Jessica: a promise is setup that resolves when the gift arrives

Jessica: C gets the gift id from the table and exports it to B

Jessica: B now has the reference, and it fullfills the promise to Bob

Jessica: Bob now has the reference to Carol

Jessica: questions?

Ian: this seems similar to what is specced out in CapNProto

Ian: except for crypto bits

Ian: you mentioned the scenario where the message from B->C comes in before A->C

Ian: and it returns a promise

Ian: The way this works in CapNProto is that the message that B sends will eventually get a return

Ian: you can pipeline stuff on it but it won't return until it resolves

Ian: this sounds like a different

Jessica: you can promise pipeline on the reference that machine C gives to B

Jessica: when gift delivery comes in, queued messages on that promise will go through

cwebber: when the promise is fulfilled, and there are multiple promises...

Ian: that was the bit that was confusing

cwebber: there's a promise internally in C

Ian: okay I think it's exactly the same then

Ian: I've been thinking about different ways to connect 2 machines

Ian: maybe one machine will be a Tor hidden service and the other knows how to speak WebRTC

Ian: what do you think about tweaking the url to be a more structured form?

cwebber: it is parsed into more structured data

cwebber: first of all, the string representation was for simplicity

cwebber: there is an issue open about ocapn uri structure

cwebber: what you don't see here is the netlayer

cwebber: .foo in this example is the netlayer, such as .onion

cwebber: you could do .swebretc or something

cwebber: time pressure pushed up this conversation, so we're skipping over important ocapn uri details

Ian: one design thing to keep in mind: when we have a bridge setup, I want machines to discover their preference for, say, CapNProto if they both speak it.

Mark: I have a high level question: I do not know CapNProto in detail. I hear a lot of the same terminology as in E.

Mark: if you are familiar enough with CapTP for E, I'd love to hear what are the semantic differences between these handoffs and what E did.

Ian: I'm not familiar with all of the E terminology

Ian: CapNProto terminology is quite different

Ian: the names are quite different than the E names

Mark: I wanted to know if anyone is familiar enough with *both* to point out differences

cwebber: the differences between capnproto and this system are what we discussed in previous meetings

cwebber: I studied E's docs, capnproto's docs, and Agoric's docs.

cwebber: there are a lot of similarities

Mark: Agoric has only designed the point-to-point system so far

Mark: I'm hearing a lot about the 3 party system here

Mark: I'm wondering if anyone understands the semantics about the 3 party system

cwebber: correct if I'm wrong: 3 party handoffs were specced but not implemented

Ian: that's correct.

Ian: there is flexibility to tweak the design

Ian: I have a client that wants me to implement it for go capnproto

Ian: window of opportunity will close soon when that becomes top priority

Mark: the E captp *did* implement it. it's rather robust.

Mark: we should really compare this in some detail with what E did because it's a working handoff protocol.

cwebber: that would be a great thing to do.

cwebber: congratulations Jessica. great presentation! *applauds*

cwebber: Mark, what did you think?

Mark: I'm sorry I was late!

Mark: having missed the first 15 minutes, I could spot similarities, but I don't have confidence about spotting the differences right now.

cwebber: Jessica, can you give an accelerated recap of the diagram?

cwebber: for mark: the I/E things are import/export tables. the hand bags are gift tables.

Mark: *question about gift tables I didn't fully catch*

cwebber: for each pairwise session, each side generates a key.

cwebber: between A and C, "these are the hand-offs I'm giving"

cwebber: the certificates enforce and encode that

cwebber: gifter is A, receiver is B, exporter is C.

cwebber: A is depositing the gift on C. it's for B but A doesn't say that.

Mark: the table itself is inside C?

cwebber: that's correct

cwebber: A also sends a certificate to B. both operations happen simultaneously.

cwebber: *recaps the handoff-give structure slide from earlier*

Alan: does that have to be B's key in A->B?

cwebber: yes, this prevents having to renegotiate keys all the time

Alan: there's a correlation risk

cwebber: we're not considering a correlation attack in this scenario

cwebber: *recaps signed handoff-give slide*

cwebber: *recaps the B->C certificate passing slide*

cwebber: B is talking to C's bootstrap object

cwebber: *recaps handoff-receive struct slide*

cwebber: replay attacks are prevented as far as I can tell

cwebber: the messages can sit on the wire and promises can be pipelined

Mark: that makes sense. it seems to be equivalent.

Mark: the only secrets are the signing keys

cwebber: which are held privately

Jessica: B's key in the A->B session, A provided that.

Jessica: because C knows its valid, it can then verify B's signature that it gave for handoff-receive

Mark: what kind of message order are you trying to achieve?

cwebber: E order is provided.

cwebber: we don't advertise E order as being a thing

cwebber: I'm suspicious of it

cwebber: what we do promise is that between A->B and A->C there is ordering

Mark: you think E order is a property of the implementation that isn't implemented

Mark: so if it didn't follow E order you wouldn't have serious issues

Alan: Do you deal with lost messages?

cwebber: it's up to the netlayer to give the guarantee of sequential order

cwebber: ocapn was intentionally designed to handle different ways of achieving message order

cwebber: ocapn assumes that order has already been dealt with by the underlying netlayer

Alan: so promises could be broken at some point if no response occurs?

cwebber: I tried to reconcile two different needs: I imagined a realtime multiplayer game and a blockchain like Agoric, and supporting both. how would you support both?

cwebber: how would you deal with session severage and breakage?

cwebber: how to deal with irreconcilable messages? i think the session would need to be broken and re-established

cwebber: you can in theory have netlayers that are realtime that assume sessions break a lot *and* long-lived things like blockchains

cwebber: that's a conversation for a future time

Ian: the ability to semantically break a connection is important for avoid denial of service attacks

cwebber: in Mark's dissertation, he provides a good case for breaking sessions in the spreadsheet example

cwebber: example: there's a cell that is being updated but the connection has been lost

cwebber: Mark says it's perfectly reasonable to break the connection between the 2 parties and use a sturdyref to re-establish the connection

cwebber: that was very motivating for me for thinking about games

Mark: that's the E failure model which avoiding the big mistake I made

Mark: starting with the E failure model is good

Ian: Capnproto does this (more or less)

Alan: can you just break a promise and keep a connection?

cwebber: we don't do that

Ian: I have thought about designs for a next-gen captp with looser ordering requirements

Ian: it would be designing a new thing entirely

cwebber: would like to know what captp udp would look like

Mark: what about GC?

Ian: capnproto does reference counting

Ian: I'm open to collecting cycles but I want to see a design that does it without being too complex

Ian: Rust and C++ makes GC difficult

cwebber: our current stuff assumes acyclic

cwebber: I'm throwing this discussion back over to Jessica

Jessica: my plan is to create a github issue with a link to the recording and slides and the minutes will available in the next day or two

Jessica: I'll get a poll up for the next meeting date

Dan: could we come up with a time now?

cwebber: I'm stopping this recording

cwebber: thank you Jessica for the awesome presentation

cwebber: she only got trained on this 6 months ago and took a leadership position on captp internally and has done a great job!

cwebber: I'm happy to talk now about the next meeting

cwebber: march?

Dan: we can do one sooner

Jessica: agreed

**Decision:** Next meeting will be 2023-02-23 8pm UTC to 9pm UTC

Jessica: could someone step up for scribing next time?

Jessica: it would be good to rotate



