# December 2024 OCapN pre-standardization meeting, 2024-12-10

- **Chair:** Jonathan Rees
- **Scribe:** David Thompson
- **Present:**
 - Jessica Tallon (Spritely)
 - Baldur (uFork?)
 - Brian Warner (Agoric)
 - David Thompson (Spritely)
 - Jonathan Rees / JAR (Independent)
 - Juli (Spritely)
 - Kris Kowal (Agoric)
 - Mark Miller (Agoric)
 - Richard Gibson (Agoric)
 - Stephan Vitka (?)
 
## Agenda

- No closed issues
- Review [proposed abstract syntax PR](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/pull/125)
- Review open issues:
  - [#20](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/20) Backpressure (skipped)
  - [#24](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/24) Proposed CapTP protocol
  - [#25](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/25) Capabilities vs. CapTP
  - [#29](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/29) OCapN Locators
  - [#142](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/142) Error type


# Minutes

JAR: I checked and there are no closed issues.  We almost finished backpressure and I want to see if we can bring that resolution, but I see that Christine is not here so maybe next time.  There are some old issues. We can get started with abstract passable data model. PR 125. I'd like to hand it over to Kris.

Kris: I'm hoping to get formal approval from this group to merge this PR with editorial approval out of band on the assumption that there are no more normative concerns. I want to start with a discussion and then a call for consensus.

JAR: What needs to be discussed?

Richard Gibson: I'm doing one more pass right now.

Kris: I am mostly looking for non-objections on the normative text.

MarkM: I already hit approve on GitHub.

Jessica: I looked through the document a few times. Generally speaking, it looks great. There has been some discussion around the term "struct". There was a proposed alternative for "dictionary" that was rejected, but how about "StringMap" to differentiate it from maps that other types of keys?

MarkM: It's not incorrect, but the reason I'm uncomfortable with it that the bad parts of JS history sensitized me to, is that generally the concept I'd except our struct to map into in a language binding is one where languages generally have per-name typing rather than uniform typing across the struct. "Map" implies uniform typing. These are soft objections that depend on concepts in the language model that are not reflected in OCapN. What we name them is a question of what connotations we want to suggest.

Kris: I think we agree "Dictionary" and "Record" are not tenable. "StringMap" isn't tenable because we will have map structures on top of "Tagged" and it will be confusing.

MarkM: Likewise the experience in JS, predating ES6, objects were used as string maps with computed keys.

Kris: The argument for struct is that it implies a fixed shape.

Dave: I think struct is equally disappointing in the sense that a struct (to me), does not apply a mapping structure of names to values. It imples a chunk of memory with fields.

MarkM: In C, struct fields have names...

Kris: In C names have fields backed by values, the memory offset is implementation detail. Structs imply string keys.

Dave: At Spritely, we were thinking that maybe it should have "String" in the name.

MarkM: As a C programmer for quite some time, I think of a struct as a mapping from string names to values. I don't think it primarily in terms of offsets. Structs and arrays both use memory offsets, but I don't experience them that way.

JAR: Kris, any ideas how to proceed?

Kris: I don't love the idea of "string" as the qualifier for the name. My feeling is we're not gonna get better than "struct", despite our reservations. My ask is if we can stomach it.

Jessica: It's not so much that there are other types of maps, but this one happens to have the constraint of strings as keys. It could have been selectors chosen. With Christine not here, I'm not sure how strong Spritely's rejection is of this name.

Kris: If we can come to a resolution on this specific topic out of band, and I have permission from this body to merge, that would be great. I could even add "tentative" next to "struct".

Dave: Sounds fine to me. Jessica?

Jessica: Sounds good.

Kris: I will add "tentative" somewhere around the word "struct". Any objections to merging after?

(No objections)

JAR: Christine isn't here to lead a discussion about backpressure, so we should table that. What is this issue for proposed CapTP protocols? Is that redundant at this point?

Jessica: Yes, the draft specifications I wrote should cover this. Is that right, Baldur?

Baldur: Yes, I wrote that way back. Close it.

JAR: Okay. Baldur, you want to close it?

Baldur: Yes.

JAR: The next issue is "capabilities vs. CapTP", what is that?

Dave: Looks unactionable, close it.

Jessica: I agree.

Kris: We may not agree on what a struct is, but I think we all agree what capabilities are here.

JAR: Next issue, "OCapN locators"

Kris: I don't think we're going to come to a conclusion, but we can start. I think they should be URIs. Do we all agree? One very concrete reason is the ability to introduce an OS hook for OCapN URIs. I think that's a strong reason to reserve a name for the protocol scheme.

JAR: I'm on the mailing list for URI review that looks at every registration request. The requirements are not draconian but they are significant. It's a nontrivial commitment to be able to call them URIs. If we have a volunteer to do that, we should go ahead.

MarkM: Whenever I've said I defined a URI format in the past, I didn't know about this definitional aspect of URIs.

JAR: I don't know if the spec says you have to register them, but I object to using URIs that are not on track to become registered URIs.

MarkM: How much of a commitment is it?

Kris: I like the idea of provisionally engaging in that process.

MarkM: Do we have volunteers to find out how much of a commitment it is?

Kris: I nominate Dan Connoly! (who isn't present but wants to pursue registration)

JAR: The review committee has a number of persnickety people who will look for reasons to defeat the proposal. It's nontrivial.

Kris: Maybe we could have a subcomittee with JAR, Richard, and Dan.

JAR: Moving on. Are there any issues anyone is particularly interested in?

Kris: I'd like to discuss how we will model errors. Issue 142. I want to start with some framing. We do not currently have anything on errors. There are two kinds of information we wish to convey with errors that will impact the pass invariance of errors. We have the choice of copy style pass invariance or we can make them consistent with targets so they could be used as a capability to refer to out of band data. We'd like them to be both data-like and capability-like. I posit that this is a false dichotomy and we need it do both, but the mechanism is up for discussion. We could make them data-like and have an OCapN API to correlate the data with a capability. Or vice versa. I think there are problems with both.  (Dave got lost in the details... something about a Hilbert Hotel or something)

MarkM: I'm going to make a complexifying suggestion, reluctantly. Some of the informational content of an error is not intended to be something that other automated programs react to or make decisions based on, but rather to bring diagnostic information to a programmer. Because errors highly correlate with clues that a programmer needs to figure out the problems. There's a dichotomy of symbolic information and diagnostic information. In the JS standard, they standardized that there is a string-valued field named "message" and another named "name". They never specify what the contents of the "message" string are and they tend to differ between platforms and versions of platforms. I'm generally against leaving things underspecified in a spec, but the underspecification leaves room to improve how informatative these error messages are over time. The engineers feel free to improve the messages incrementally. What round tripping requirements should we put on OCapN? For it to be friendly to JS errors, I would seek the content of the name field round trip and the content of the message field is irrelevant. If the content of the message field comes back different, that's not a violation of round tripping. With promises, we don't say there's a notion of round tripping of promise equality, I feel the same about errors. We want some interop of diagnostic Causeway-like tools. To get interop there, those tools are all about gathering diagnostic information and stitching them together. The suggestion I want to make is a spec level specifically for runtimes and debugging tools.

Jessica: Generally, error messages in Guile has a type, with a string message, and other types of errors can have additional information. When an error happens, we catch the backtrace. Currently, when that hits the CapTP boundary, we send an opaque "mystery" error. The reason is about how sending error messages/backtraces to just anybody can be problematic. Ideally, you'd get Causeway over CapTP. For our local vats, we use message timestamps to build a picture of the message structure. Ideally, this is not in CapTP, but I think some stuff will need to be in CapTP to enable these sorts of tools, though.

Kris: I think we are largely in agreement about the shape of the problem. From the JS side, we also don't generally want the backtrace to go over the wire. How do we determine what information goes in-band in OCapN error messages? We need a way to corelate the in-band error value with out-of-band diagnostic data. My feeling is that we will want to privilege the message property of errors. I have concerns around round tripping error types. Type names that a Goblin error produced may not be recognized in JS, for example. That's a complication I would love to avoid. It would be completely satisfying to omit that information. Given that we're in agreement that there should be a higher level protocol for a diagnostic debugger, we still need a mechanism in the OCapN error object to correlate them with an outbound source. One of them that Dave might mention is a sequence number. The problem is the number would have to be correlated by a third party. My preference is for error objects to be correlated to something much like a target. I think that is the minimum we need to express. I am open to hearing lovely options to solve this conundrum. I think we've agreed that an error object conveys a message, maybe some other in-band data properties, and a diagnostic token. And I think we want the diagnostic token to be the sole means of accessing the additional information.

JAR: I'd like to take a minute to ask for a scribe volunteer, preferably from Agoric.

Kris: I don't think we have enough Agoric people on the call to find one right now. We'll have one before next month.

MarkM: I disagree with the technical position that Kris just stated. I think that whatever symbolic information is conveyed with an error is information a program should be able to use to react to an error. I think that they out of band information really must be the diagnostic information. One of the reasons for putting it out of band is so it can be denied. Stack traces can reveal security sensitive information. Causeway is built on that assumption and worked on the assumption of a partial set of logs, assuming some were denied. Out of band information might not be available until much later than when a program needs to react. There's a category I will call Throwables, and Throwables do not contain capabilities. The reason is the restriction that Agoric imposes: nonthrowables cannot be thrown. Nonthrowables are coerced to throwables. It is not feasible to always be thinking about what data might go over the "throw" pathway. Promise rejection reasons cannot be nonthrowable.

JAR: We aren't going to finish this conversation. Kris, want to suggest an action?

Kris: How about continuing this at the next meeting?

JAR: Is there anything anyone can do to prepare for that?  File an issue, etc.

Kris: I would like to call upon Spritely to comment on the issue that already exists.

JAR: Okay, good.  I think we're done.

