# April 2024 OCapN pre-standardization meeting, 2023-04-09

- **Chair:** Jessica Tallon (stepping in for Jonathan Rees who is away travelling)
- **Scribe:** David Thompson
- **Present:**
  - Bengo
  - Christine Lemmer-Webber (Spritely)
  - David Thompson (Spritely)
  - Jessica Tallon (Spritely)
  - Kris Kowal (Agoric)
  - Mark Miller (Agoric)
  - Richard Gibson (Agoric)
  - Ross Schulman (EFF)

## Minutes

Jessica: Jonathan Rees cannot attend this meeting so I am dusting off my Chair hat.

Jessica: For the agenda, I commented yesterday with 2 suggestions.  There were some action items assigned to Spritely and Agoric. I want to apologize on Spritely's side because we didn't get a chance to get to our items.

MarkM: I will make the same apology on the Agoric sides.

Jessica: Then we can postpone those issues until next month. The 2 items I suggested were discussing how to approach distributed debugging and error handling across CapTP boundaries. We want to deal with this in the coming months at Spritely and we're not sure how we want to proceed yet. The other is to continue the concrete syntax discussion from last meeting *if* we think we can make progress despite Spritely/Agoric not making progress on action items. Any preferences?

MarkM: I think that given what we haven't done, I don't think going back into concrete syntax would be productive at this time. I talked to Randy Farmer, and I think I may have left a misunderstanding. When I said "can we just get started with interop experiments with smallcaps" I didn't mean to say that we should just use smallcaps as-is, but that we use it as a starting point. Spritely has shown that it easy for them to speak smallcaps. We know it doesn't meet all the requirements and that it might not grow to meet them. I think it would just be nice to get going on interop. Talking about post facto debugging and error collection would be great. If what Spritely is collecting serves our needs, that would be a great opportunity.

Kris: I wanted to voice my enthusiasm for seeing Christine's demo that she hinted at before the meeting started.

Christine: It's not strictly an OCapN thing, but it is something I think the group would find interesting. It is about our serialization system, derived from the "Safe Serialization under mutual suspicion" paper. It could be interesting from a distributed debugging perspective as part of the data you share, but it's not immediately an OCapN thing.  Should I do that now?

Kris: Do you want to respond to Mark first?

Christine: Sure. I'm excited to proceed on interoperability. I don't have much else to say, but I'll say that.  If everyone is OK with seeing this demo then I'll just do it. And it might be a fun break from talking about concrete syntax. Some of you may have seen this before, this is a space shooter I wrote very early on while developing Goblins back when it was in Racket. It runs in the terminal with ASCII art. I ported it to Guile Goblins. You can save state and restore to a previous point in time. It's using Goblins' time travel ability.  But what about storing something to disk. Let's capture something interesting. There's the player ship, the kamikaze fighter, some "squigglers", and some UI. One of the nice things about Goblins is you can do live hacking while things are running.  I'm going to import some stuff to persist data to disk using Syrup encoding. I'm going to get a reference to the current level we're running. Now I'm going to get a syrup store so we can save to disk. Then I'm going to make a serialization environment. The interesting thing that Goblins is doing is that serialization can be thought of as "uneval" and "unapply". It's like an inverse metacircular evaluator. Here's the file, to show that I have nothing up my sleeves. It's not efficiently stored, gzipped it would be much smaller, but the running level is stored to disk now. Now I'm going to quit the game and bring it back to life. I've started it back up and now it's paused. Now I'm going to reconnect my REPL to this new process. First I'm going to import a module and make a new syrup store. I'm going to take our transactional actormap and pop the state and bump us back to the main menu. Now I'm going to restore the level from disk using the syrup store and level environment. Now I'm going to push onto the FSA the new level... and it didn't work. Need to git stash my changes and try again. Apologies! *Christine re-does the demo setup* ... Sorry, you got the fun experience of seeing me do it live and not succeeding! What I can show you is that saving to disk works! It only stores the things that are necessary. It's not orthogonal persistence. It's manual persistence with a lot of the convenience of orthogonal persistence.

MarkM: I want to express with appreciation. I miss Data E. You're one of the only people that took that work and reimplemented it. I never got anywhere close to getting it all working.

Christine: I'll show a simpler example using a cell. *explains the cell actor and types in the code* How much work is it to switch it over to make it persistence-compatible? You change 'define' to 'define-actor' and it just works. I'm going to make a persistence environment. I originally used a rights amplification approach, but Jessica and I figured out another way to do it that doesn't require it. 

MarkM: What does the ^ mean?

Christine: That's a naming convention we use to mark actor constructors.

Christine: Now I'm going to persist this version of the cell. And here is the self-portait of the cell with the data of sword. There was a lot of work required to make it "just work" with minimal changes to existing actors. This morning we were able to restore a running game mid-level.  Now here's a jsyrup representation of the level data. This is the actual data structure of the running game.  Let's look at the player ship. There's an object here for the alive player ship, with near references to actors. It wakes up with promises that get resolved, as you described Mark.  An enemy bullet in mid-space has its coordinates, etc.  All of these things are captured. It's *not* orthogonal persistence. You do have to do some porting. Simple actors are easy to port, actors as complicated as in Terminal Phase take some time to port.

MarkM: I'm very impressed. This is where I wanted to go with E but didn't get there.  In order to calibrate expectations, I didn't follow this in any detail. Unfamiliar syntax, and I've been in a tense meeting all day. I love the sense of what I'm seeing here, though.

Christine: I will share the actual working code later and share a gif showing it off. We used several observations from your paper, Mark, like how not everything needs to be saved. It doesn't store the whole level in memory. It stores the level file and the offset and it just skips ahead to the right part.  The scrolling background also doesn't need to be saved since it's just cosmetic, so you get a new random starfield each time. Saves space to leave it out. These objects automatically persist with a version tag of 0, unless you specify an explicit version. You can also apply upgrade paths. We're storing to syrup here, but other backends are possible. We're planning to add a SQLite store, for example. You could have a database schema tailored to specific types of objects to store data even more efficiently. We're of course very inspired by E for all of this.  I hope people enjoyed the demo.

MarkM: Absolutely!

Jessica: I think there's some interest in talking about distributed debugging requirements.

MarkM: Yes.

MarkM: I can kick it off from our side. One of the things that pervades the whole issue is the distinction between information that programs should be willing to reveal to other programs that they might be suspicious of vs. useful diagnostic information that programs might want to privately emit to help a human programmer find out, after the fact, why something went wrong. Where this shows up most obviously is stack traces. In JS, an error object carries a stack trace and that's the only place. The error is thrown to callers it doesn't trust and revealing the stack trace to callers is not what you want to do. The Causeway inspired direction we want to go is that as diagnostic information, especially stack traces, are generated that it's streamed out to some external diagnostic collector. What you're streaming out is symbolic information that is meant to be post-processed externally to answer questions that come up later. So the other thing that we're using errors for in JS is the turn to turn causality. First locally within a vat, which is what we currently have, and then causality flow as messages between different vats happen. You want to capture the stack at the moment the eventual send happens. The deep stack is the stack of the current turn plus the stacks of turns going back in causality. The rights to see this information have to be managed. We assume you'll only get a partial picture because only some of the participants will be willing to share, so Causeway will stitch up the information into as good of a picture as you can get.

Jessica: Dave and I have spoken a bit about how to get debugging information from an actor by using a capability to ask an actor for its debug info. We haven't figured out how it would work yet.

Christine: Dave is familiar with the Causeway paper because he had to implement it. We have process-local debugging that follows the ideas of Causeway plus the time travel stuff we added.

MarkM: To clarify, Causeway gathered logs from multiple vats and stitched them together.

Christine: Our system works with multiple vats but in a single process. What we don't support yet is multiple vats talking over the network. We assume that a developer being at the REPL has more power because they're the developer. Causeway is a post-mortem debugger but Goblins has a live one. One observation is that you need a zoo of exception types. 2 simple ones to start off: A kind that you assume any error handler can have. A different one is an exception being thrown with a stack trace, which is dangerous to give out to just anyone.

MarkM: That's the key distinction for me. The rights of your caller vs. the rights of your developer. The developer gets to see magic internals that the caller does not.

Christine: One thing I think is relevant to us, if we just look at OCapN/CapTP: if an exception is thrown, there's the "you reached your quota" case where anyone can see that info. Then there's the runtime exception where you need the developer to examine. The former you want to share freely, the latter you want to share something opaque or encrypted. Goblins currently shares an opaque "mystery error" object. It would be ideal if we could cooperate with a developer remotely. We could encrypt the payload with the stack info and hand it to the developer. Ignoring the stack trace, even a string associated with the exception is something you might want to encrypt. Mark, do you agree that this level of information is something important even without involving Causeway yet?

MarkM: When we form diagnostic information that we use to throw an exception, we carefully distinguish between the redacted and unredacted information. We still take the attitude that the reason you are communicating with the caller is to share diagnostic information about what went wrong. If nothing is wrong, I shouldn't use errors to indicate a problem, but we have a quasi-literal for forming an error we call Fail. The literal part is always unredacted and the stack trace is redacted. When an error gets logged to our console, the redacted error creation operations are all with the console so that the console is in a position to do rights amplification.

Jessica: We're almost at time and Kris is on the queue.

Kris: I have a brain dump... but I can wait.

Jessica: I'd like to hear it.

MarkM: I can stay a bit longer.

Kris: Some of the other prior art I have seen include a Google paper that lead to open tracing. They do fan out and there's an emphasis on latency monitoring. The thing that they have that is relevant is that they construct traces/spans. If you drop an intermediate, you can still collect all the spans relevant to a trace even though the causal graph is broken and you might still be able to form an answer. I expect this to be relevant to our case. My expectation is that if you are debugging a distributed system you will want to subscribe to all the systems that will have spans that can help you. Within the open telemetry model, they make a distinction between in-band and out-of-band propagation. They minimize in-bound information and maximize out-of-band. They use reservoir filtering/a finite buffer for collecting spans. An out-of-band aggregator polls to flush the buffer. An idea I've had is to use the entropy of the trace/span to prioritize. If you have a vast amount of traces in your database, you can prioritize aggregation based on the trace id so that you get complete traces, all the span, for low numbered traces and less as the number increases. There's a distinction between programmer errors and other errors. One of the JS original sins is that a programmer error like a reference error is a compile error that is deferred to runtime and its most useful to "die and leave a pretty corpse" in that case. We spent a lot of time at a previous job to get heap dumps of errors like reference errors. Ideally, reference errors would have been a class of their own, distinct from other types of errors. That's all I have to say about distributed traces right now.

Dave: All this stuff really resonates with me. I've spent a lot of time at previous jobs trying to filter out stuff. I'd love to speak to you more about this stuff.

Christine: Here's the store/restore demo that actually works! I'll let you wrap up the meeting, Jessica.

Jessica: We've had some good discussions about debugging so I'm excited to talk more at the next meeting. I'll have the minutes ready tomorrow, as usual.
