# Feburary 2025 OCapN pre-standardization meeting, 2025-02-11

- **Chair**: Jonathan Rees 
- **Scribe**: David Thompson
- **Present**:
  - Baldur (independent)
  - Christine Lemmer-Webber (Spritely)
  - Jonathan Rees (Independent)
  - binarydigitz01 (Independent)
  - David Thompson (Spritely)
  - Juliana Sims (Spritely)
  - Kris Kowal (Agoric)
  - Mark Miller (Agoric)
  - Richard Gibson (Agoric)
  - Jessica Tallon (Spritely)


## Agenda

- No closed issues
- Review [Notation PR](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/pull/147)
- Review open issues:
  - [#20](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/20) Backpressure
  - [#29](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/29) OCapN Locators

# Minutes

Christine: Despite me showing this, Juli, dave, Jessica and Andy wingo did most of the work. We finally have spritely Goblins in the browser. We showed goblin chat before between racket and guile talking between the two. If you have firefox you can follow along, chrome requires a specific flag. This is the same code as the GIF shown, 150 lines of authenticated chat. The *very* same code compiles and is running here, it's running OCapN (using a simulated netlayer). When we type messages between the two, these are two OCapN endpoints. It's using syrup OCapN that we're deploying in Goblins. Jessica can talk more about OCapN and how it relates this. This is all scheme code, the origional 150 lines running in the browser!

Dave: yay!

Kris: Hazzah!

Christine: Nothing else to say.

Dave: We simulated the network here, but we can do real networking, we just didn't want any infrastructure to show it off.

Christine: Regarding syrup vs. others... I think we agreed to not re-open this immediately as we spent a year coming to the decision of syrup.

Kris: Congrats on the milestone.

JAR: Looking at closed issues, I don't think there are any at the moment

JAR: I currently have the same agenda as last time, open issues, because nobody volunteered a topic

Kris: Not looking at the agenda for the moment but as an editor, have a PR open for catching up relevant subset of syrup and preserves in ocapn situation, wanted to ask fellow editor whether it's wanted, and if wanted see if async review is sufficient. Pretense for writing this is it would give ground for mapping in a concrete representation for the data representation which I believe is not written anywhere, correct me if I'm wrong

Jessica: I did look at this yesterday, sorry it took so long to get to this, it was a very very busy january and beginning of february. Generally looks good, have a few small comments, will write after this meeting

Kris: Alright sounds good to me

JAR: We have a bunch of PRs open, thought I might allocate some time at our next meeting on that. Seems like a lot of PRs to be open. But for what I have for today, the main thing that's been sitting there for a while is the backpressure item, and what to do next for this, because Christine proposed a resolution. Do we want to talk about this?

Christine: Last time I left a summary of what we said in the meeting with a suggested resolution. CapTP does not itself handle network overload migitation, but mentioning it might be handled at a different level. meta netlayers are required to handle this and inform CapTP - important dropping messaging or re-ordering messages is not permitted. New issue should be opened about message delivering garentees. Open issues for specific netlayers. Close this issue (#20) for now. Kris commented he agrees.

(see comment for more info https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/20#issuecomment-2471449037).

Christine: If people are happy we open those issues described and close this issue. Any objections or other comments?

JAR: sounds good

Kris: I support

Dave: I support

Mark: This looks good to me. "at-least-once" being not supported is good. So, there's no backpressure being provided at this level of abstraction. How does an application talking to a counterparty sense backpressure and how does a counterparty indicate the backpressure? It's all well and good to say this level doesn't deal with it but it's good to know it's possible for other levels to deal with it.

Kris: My inclination is to defer. It's possible a netlayer could show backpressure. an application could have this ability. Pacing probably would be observable if you have a latency heartbeat.

Mark: In order to have an application sense backpressure, it must sense backpressure (?). You have to deal with if a message is sent and nobody downstream has room for the message. It's nice to understand how one would enable an application to sense backpressure and to understand if a counterparty needs to signal backpressure.

Kris: It might be needed for a specific netlayer to work with one another about backpressure.

Mark: ?

Kris: There are cases where an antaganist might sense it's being paced.

Mark: Interesting point.

JAR: Is it clear which of these new issues is about applications sensing pressure

Christine: let me ask a clarifying question... Mark and Kris, are you thinking this would be a protocol consideration (would a netlayer itself be sending things back and forth). Might netlayers choose to send messages to their objects? It wouldn't be possible for us to say a netlayer cannot inform their objects, it's potentionally a MAY i.e. netlayers MAY inform their objects. But it feels like it's not a protocol concern. Not saying it's not worth bringing up.

Mark: If you're saying level of abstraction A doesn't solve the problem even though it's nessesery. Another layer will need to solve it, backpressure is one of the least authority delimemma. You might deny with the consequence of gridlock or disconnect. Gridlock makes a lot of platform assumptions. That's the overall stance. Regarding if it's a protocol issue, we're mostly interested in specifying the CapTP netlayer protocol. What are we proposing to standardize regarding the netlayer protocol?

Christine: There isn't one specific netlayer protocol, there's many netlayer protocols. There is an interface.

Mark: Lets talk about the interface. Specifying that protocol between the layers. This could happen with a MAY between that interface.

Christine: this is worth capturing, even a ping-pong style thing, it can be done in CapTP. Kris would you be willing to capture this in the issue? My proposal is we capture this and move on with opening those issues.

Kris: I was going to say the same thing in different words. To answer if this issue would come to bare on this protocol? I think this depends on if we carve out a message type for this interface. specifically the only thing we would consider adding to the protocol would be ping-pong message or maybe queue depth but I'm less sure of that. But yes, will capture.

Mark: WRT letency. I was thinking of backpressure-like things that aren't backpressure. The nature of promise pipelining, it does not demand every message send to a promise pipeline is imemdiately pipelining. There is an option of hanging on to messages until it decides to pipeline. If you know the capacity of no. messages in the air between the sender and receiver which is more "bandwith" than "latency". Then you know you're not going to get further promise pipeling beneifit.

Kris: What you're describing is usually called "The bandwith delay product". There is an algorithm called CoDel which is relevent to this. If you're going to try and pace the sender you can do this via a feedback loop on differential latency. When packets are limited by distance and speed of light, it doesn't get faster than that.

Mark: Since we're not specifying in OCapN how a language interfaces with the protocol... then this issue about whether to further pipeline or not falls into the same bucket as we can avoid specifying or inhibit solving this.

Kris: Algorithms like I describe can operate on things it can sense beneth the CapTP layer and ought to. Applicaiton layer latency is more variable, it's not as useful as a signal.

JAR: Next steps? Kris will capture this discussion somewhere. I will piggyback onto one of the issues specified. Christine if you can proceed with the issues you planned. I will follow up with Mark's issue.

Christine: I accept being voluntold! I will do it!

JAR: Thank you!

JAR: Next issue is about locators which is a different issue than what we talked about, issue #29 on ocapn locators and serialized references. There's a PR, so maybe if someone wants to just instruct me to accept the PR we can have a resolution here, but we can talk about anything else to talk about. A lot of people have commented on this and it's quite old

JAR: but Jessica you wrote that section of the spec?

Jessica: I wrote the draft spec on locators and opened the issue

JAR: Question is next step?

Jessica: When I opened there was a lot of debate of whether it should be a URI or not, it seemed last time we talked was tentatively yes but depends on how much work. I feel not caught up on this issue

Kris: Last issue I remember holding was precede on assumption they are URIs and look into it in more formal way. Opinion is these do need to be more sensible for application-level hooks so can be more acceptable for out-of-band messages

JAR: Trying to remember if there's any precedent for this? this isn't something you'll get into MacOS anytime soon

Kris: applications can register need to handle something a handler for certain URI schemes, these links tend to open the app. We could do registered domain approach, disadvantage is it's not decentralized. My hope is we don't have to register certificate domain

MarkM: I was wondering if as the shapers of the ocapn standard, what the ocapn stance is on some other issues where there's some degrees of freedom and kind of meta to base messaging protocol. I'll raise then we can discuss what position we should take. One issue is message ordering, I know we've discussed message ordering, but can't remember if ocapn has taken a stance on message ordering. Two viable options to consider is E-order which I'm not suggesting or point-to-point FIFO together with an after-operation so one can handle an after-operation. So that's the ordering issue, and then there's the garbage collection issue, and then there's the partition and error model issue. E had partition, waterken did not. Because E had partition we distinguished between captp live refs and sturdyrefs and etc, and sturdyrefs can be recovered after a partition

Christine: what mark said is important. I know me and mark have talked about ordering before, I think a little bit in the group. I think it's important to look if those things are filed as issues? Kris mentioned the ability in macOS to register handlers for certain URI schemes. There's a distinction here between domains and schemes. There is no need for the domain name system to register a scheme, there is no need for schemes to use the domain name system. Schemes are often used before they reach the IETF. One thing that is worth considering: One of the advantages of a URI is that you can easily copy and paste in applications (e.g. terminals will underline them). One question for OCapN URIs is what happens when you click on it, there might be many applications which use them. Lets focus on sturdyref URIs, mark I know there's a distinction between the textual encoding and URIs... But the question of what happens when you click on it, there's a base expection when you click on a HTTP request. This won't be true for many CapTP URIs. I've noticed a lot of people will register URI schemes for intents, this happened with DIDs, people ended up having an addition scheme after it which makes them not valid URIs. If you had two OCapN applications, one for launching missiles (not recommended!!!) and one for ordering food... This is a tricky problem. My personal gut is that the right resolution is that we have an intent:scheme so we can encode the intent. This helps in the situation where the link itself might not provide enough info to help know what to do with it. I just wanted to bring this up because it's tricky, it is *the* argument raised against URIs and I think it's the responsibility of the group to address it.

Kris: My explorations on this, with the endo petname project, it continues to be my intention to have something like a URI, and I think ideally it's an OCapN URI, where the pet daemon or your user agent of choice would be in a position to register an opportunity to name a thing and put it in your pet store. The direction that project is heading is to allow for enhancements in its behavior to be captured in query string information. Non-normative and casual annotation of ocapn uri with conventional name of what thing to do with it, so your pet demon of choice is in a position to surface it and introduce it. That's kind of the direction we're going, I think an OCapN URI would be adequate for that, it would be an adequate stopgap to have (?). That's as far as I've gotten with this line of inquiry

Christine: We're using the query params for hints at the moment. We could distinguish between query parameters which are hints and others for intents for what kind of application. It's interesting to hear endo folks are experimenting with this too, we need to be having more conversations there. I'm fine with it being in the query parameters. Jessica can clarify on this but you can use whatever query parameters for hints for routing. What we're talking about here is application intent hints

Jessica: Yes it's currently that query parameters are hints, and it's relevant to the netlayer. The port it's running on, it kind of defines those. And equally it only pays attention to those. Technically you might define other query parameters but, we could do that. I queued myself earlier to say you have a user agent registered for ocapn URIs, that feels like reinventing the idea of the URI dispatcher built into most OS'es. So I do understand Christine's question about "they don't encode intent" even though I do advocate wanting a clickable thing so they're easy to copy and move around. You often want to click an email and it opens a mail client, click a phone and it opens a phone dialer, obviously we want the same thing with phone applications, I do wonder if we're reinventing that. Could we do ocapn:foo for the foo application type but that does require registering something new every time

JAR: I believe Kris wanted to say something to my request

Kris: To answer about what action we should take, my feeling is this is an important topic, where is the lowest hanging fruit in order, that solidified in the spec for the data model, followed by the details of the netlayer, then this. So the action I would propose would be to schedule this to be a topic in the future and continue this conversation, with a lower priority than the stuff that's close to being done, which is specifically finishing the message protocol. To jessica's point, I agree this does re-capitulate some of the features of the OS, but OCapN is a bit different because we are explicitly introducing where the user is decicding when and where to capture a reference and to introduce a particular app with a particular profile, which I think are features relevant to the pet demon. And I suspect this is a stopgap, because I expect our ocap things to succeed, and then these approaches can sink into the OS agent, at which point the OS can handle it. Again to make explicitly clear if I click an ocapn reference with an intent for maliciousapp.com there should be the possibility to say do you want to view this in a bomb proof room or the room that has the keys?

JAR: Don't see anyone on queue and it's 3pm

DaveT: Any futher action we can capture?

Christine: It would be great to capture into an issue

Kris: I can capture

JAR: Next step on this issue?

Kris: Put it on ice, then put debate until we finish rest of captp. I think we agree on op:deliver and everything else needs work and I'd like to get farther than that

Jessica: We have a websocket we implemented in the latest version, it's websockets that are secure because the browser requires that in most contexts, if that seems interesting we could bring to the group

Christine: We have websockets but you need to use tls

Jessica: outside the browser our websocket layer *does* support handoffs, but it's generally supported with handoffs *outside* the netlayer.

Kris: websockets having message framing is a good place to start

Dave: Sounds like we're approaching consensus

JAR: Okay, meeting adjourned
