# Attendees

* Chair: Jonathan Rees
* Scribe: Dan Connolly (Agoric)
* Present
  - Jessica Tallon (Spritely)
  - Christine Lemmer-Webber (Spritely)
  - David Thompson (Spritely)
  - Kris Kowal (Agoric)
  - Mark Miller (Agoric)
  - Richard Gibson (Agoric)

# Agenda

cf. https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/152

Work on the draft spec https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/pulls.

# Minutes

## An encounter with the Erlang community

CW: I'm at an event; talked with a member of the Erlang community; "OCapN won't work in Erlang because it involves accessing raw memory" -- seems like a mis-communication.

## JS evolution to support ByteArray

MM: In order for Agoric to support byte array like we do string, we're making progress in the JS stds body around ImmutableArrayBuffer.

CW: it would be great if that helped with perf woes... performance limitations of sharing byte arrays and strings between Wasm and the JS side of browsers: you sort of have to make a round trip for each byte (or at least: each i32, or maybe a handful of i32s).

(DC: cf https://community.spritely.institute/t/shared-memory-gpu-access-in-genode-a-capability-based-os-framework/688 )

## PR155 - Document abstract notation and concrete representation of the data model

KK: PR 148 - reported mis-spelling of “pluribus”, please review. https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/pull/155

JT: I can look at this, Kris.

MM: Is the mapping from abstract notation to concrete representation canonical?

KK: It could be either way, so let’s discuss which way we want to go.

MM: Is order of struct members the only exception?

KK: Whitespace too.

CW: (History of Preserves and Syrup) Syrup supports pretty-printing.

MM: NaNs?

MM: The cost of requiring canonical form seems low; let's please do.

CW: I agree that anything transmitted over OCapN should be canonical Syrup.

DC: Remind me what is the encoding?

CW: A float64 is a literal "D" followed by the standard bytes of an IEEE 754 64-bit floating point number.

CW: I'm open to scoping this doc to a single NaN representation.

MM: We can constrain things along Postel's Law.

CW: Yes, and I'm open to applying the Robustness Principle.

DC: My experience with the Robustness Principle in Web standards is negative.
cf. [Michal Zalewski's book](https://www.amazon.com/Tangled-Web-Securing-Modern-Applications/dp/1593273886)

MM: Then perhaps being strict is fine.

DC: Then the benefit of interop with existing syrup software seems at-risk.

CW: Not too worried about existing Syrup code.

KK: What I hear is ... abstract notation.

MM: The what?

KK: The CapTP is written using Preserves...

CW: There's a textual encoding of Preserves as well as Syrup.

MM: So, the “abstract notation” is about the concrete syntax, not the abstract data model?

KK: Yes, perhaps we should just call it "the OCapN notation"?

CW: "abstract types"?

DC: I give my proxy on this to Kris and Jessica; seems editorial.

CW: OK

MM: OK

JR: OK

KK: OK; I've heard _various terminology recommendations_ and will come to a resolution with JT over the course of reviewing this PR.

## Possible Venue evolution

CW: At this event, I ran into Daniel Appelquist [sp?] of the W3C TAG.

CW: he suggested a W3C CG: easy to make; can borrow lots of process, IP stuff...
by precedent: WASM does most of the work in a CG and then presents to the WG

MM: ECMA should be a candidate.

KK: I'm not familiar with CG versus WG etc. clues?

DC: A CG is anything 3 people want to do.

JR: A WG involves the whole W3C process.

CW: The main benefit of a CG is signalling a direction and adoption of some IP policy.

CW: Much of the community can't tell the difference between a CG note and a Standard.

KK: My impression of IETF is that the bar for an RFC is 2 interoperable implementations...

CW: OTOH, sending a signal might expose us more attention than we want at this stage.

CW: The conversation with D.A. got me thinking about how we have a spec, test suite, 1+ implementations, which he suggested is more than many efforts that approach a stds body.

KK: JSON didn't pick a venue; stds bodies picked it up;

MM: In >= 1 case, misinterpreted json.org.

We resolved to continue thinking about this topic but no action or issue planned.
