# April 2025 OCapN pre-standardization meeting, 2025-04-08

- **Chair**: Jonathan Rees
- **Scribe**: Christine Lemmer-Webber
- **Present**:
  - Alistair Woodman (EEF)
  - Baldur (Independent)
  - Christine Lemmer-Webber (Spritely)
  - Amy Pillow (Spritely)
  - David Thompson (Spritely)
  - Juliana Sims (Spritely)
  - Jessica Tallon (Spritely)
  - Mark Miller (Agoric)
  - Kris Kowal (Agoric)
  - Richard Gibson (Agoric)
  - Jonathan Reese (Independent)
  - Jeff Henrickson (?)


## Agenda

- No closed issues
- [#55](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/55) Interoperability of promise multi-resolution
- [#101](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/101) Identifying promise and object references
- [#154](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/154) Propose op:get

# Minutes

Jonathan: Issue 55. Could someone who's more familiar with this one do a summary of what needs to be done

Christine: We’ve seen a couple of Syrup implementations. One mentioned interest in a full OCapN implementation.
Dave? Can you pull that up? I know we have notes on that somewhere.

Dave: Are you referring to the Dart implementation?

Christine: Yes

Dave: I can find it, one sec. https://codeberg.org/ridley/dart_syrup

Christine: We also have one person on the call, if you don’t mind a mention, Alistair Woodman from Erlang. There’s been interest from the Erlang community.

Alstair: I work for the foundation and am generally curious and am curious whether the Erlang community should pay attention. We are used in high scale messaging systems and at the moment I don’t have a posse of developers but I am trying to figure out whether I should round one up.

Dave: Username ridley, Spritely community member, possibly interested in implementing ocapn in another language, started with syrup in dart

Kris: I'm also aware that Aaron Kumavis at Metamask is exploring syrup and ocapn as a side project in javascript

Dave: Yes, Kumavis has been sending messages and asking questions. Increasing interest in syrup, and is making requests in terms of things to make it easier to implement. For example, some examples, messages in ocapn, as a way to test that parser is working correctly. Kumavis has also opened issue in syrup repo. I think they're using hardened js

Christine: Kumavis is also implementing ocapn, and is implementing from implementers guide. Has found missing things, eg argument types not specified in deliver operators

Kris: And now maybe we should get into issues

Jonathan: Yes maybe I should have asked for announcements, but people have done them. I think we're ready to move on unless there's surprises.

Kris: If someone can share issue #55 or bestow the ability to share screen

Christine: With minimal power comes minimal responsibility, you may now share

Kris: You should now see issue #55, filed by Richard Gibson. I think run into ground already, I believe we already have consensus and data model reflects it, which is that a promise may be fulfilled to exactly one ocapn data value / passable value, or exactly one fulfillment or rejection reason. So please correct me if wrong. I think this implies this can eliminate op:pick from captp. The name op:pick by design extracts the nth value from a resolution. Since there's only one that obviates op:pick. I believe we're already in agreement we should just do editorial work and close issue

Christine: We believe that it's possible without any changes to the data model to preserve the possibility of a promise having abstract multiple values within, shall we say, passable user space with a new tagged data structure that would specifically represent multiple values. Should someone move forward with that we can address it later and we can absolutely get rid of op:pick

MarkM: So one of the things that ocapn is trying to do support well is promise pipelining to reduce latency for multiple requests. So one of the things about promise pipelining is that there's pass-by-copy stuff, such as lists and records, and when you want to interact with an element of a list or element of record, there's no way to pipeline that, and there's complexity in changing that. So that's an interesting hard case. But the reason I'm bringing that up is that say for arrays, adding an operation that can be sent to the site that knows the array so you can pipeline through the array element lookup would help promise pipeline at the cost of getting into other trouble, but it's true we can postpone it

Kris: Let me skip forward in agenda to issue #154 since it's relevant, since I am proposing that once we drop op:pick that we introduce op:get, which would allow for obtaining a promise for the named field value within a struct

MarkM: What about named index value of a list

Kris: Potentially the same, potentially distinct

MarkM: This is what I have in mind, with this in front of us I feel no need to defend op:pick

Kris: I think we should close the issue after making editorial changes to spec. I volunteer to close the PR that when merged would close #55.

Jonathan: I will put you as assignee for the issue.

Kris: with that, how about we go to #154. I have questions about this one, there's an interrelated issue. My understanding is that for promise pipelining, in the case where you send a message to an object with op:deliver, the result is an answer slot, and the answerer has a design choice, and I don't know what we currently state in the captp spec. If the ultimate resolution is a target, there's a potential of... (?). And there's no downside of saying this promise has settled with the passable value of a remoteable. Whereas if a promise settles to a struct which contains a target field, in which case there's a potential opportunity to avoid transmitting the subfield of the struct

Kris: If the consumer is only interested in one field, there's an opportunity with op:get instead of op:listen there's an opportunity to declare not being interested

MarkM: Remind me about op:listen

Kris: My expectation is that as written, one of the design spaces for the captp is that when send an op:deliver, if interested in whether or not a pipeline...

Jessica: op:(deliver/listen?) you can specify an answer position which is immediately used, htere's also a resolve-me descriptor field, where you specify that you want to be informed of the result. You specify a resolver, when resolved you get value, you normally would not normally send an op:listen after an op:deliver. If passed a promise as a result you may want to listen to that and see what its resolution is

MarkM: For the programmer looking at protocol, if doing eventual send, that promise... depending on what that operation is at the language level is, that promise may or may not be guaranteed to be eventually fulfilled


Christine: The reason is that in other languages there has been what has been called memorandum which is when you listen to a promise and want the result but in E in a promise you can use the memorandum method please notify me once the promise resolves. If you ended up sending a message it could end up being pipelined ahead, so instead there was a operation for listening for a promise instead.


MarkM: What you're saying is accurate unfortunately for our js implementation. It's not accurate for E. In E, there was no methods. All those messages were eventually delivered to promises fulfilled. The way you'd do the ask to be notified is that it was essentially a static method, E.when(), which tooked a promise and a callback.

Kris: In E it was syntax

MarkM: In E it was syntax, but Christine is right, the syntax was sugar, it ended up at the foundational abstraction, it was a message .whenMoreResolved().

Jonathan: Baldur, ack

Baldur: I understand that listen has same functionality as (?) deliverop in old captp, so i understood you didn't send an op:listen that you did not know the answer to the resolution of the promise, you only wanted to refer to promise for sake of promise pipelining

Christine: I think you're right but I'm not completely sure I understood Baldur but I want to rephrase my understanding. If someone is interested in a resolution, then they send an op:listen, what Kris has suggestted instead is that you might not send an op:listen if you end up doing a op:get and you don't end up supplying an op:listen to whatever you're supplying. Which I think it would be possible to do, but I forget if op:listen is not specified my understanding is that there wouldn't be something on the other side asking for a resolution. So in the example of the car factory promise that you send a drive method, if you pipeline the method for the drive function, you wouldn't need to transmit an op:listen. So my understanding of Kris' proposal is that you could select one of those particular items of the gas amount or noise or whatever.

Kris: Yes, that is the design idea I want to discuss. As you discuss it I get the sense that it's a good idea to separate op:listen from op:get. You get the option to settle on a target, you might not want an op:listen.

MarkM: I'm fine with all of this, it's perfectly fine for the protocol to have more degrees of freedom than the language binding may express, say the JS java binding, since different implmentations what the experience is like. I do want to understand what we expect the interaction to be, where the programmer is operating on these things similarly to when they operate on local things. It's supposed to be the case that if you use the eventual operators, it's not that you know things are remote, you don't operate on the assumption it's remote, you operate on the lack of assumption it's local, you're defining it under two categories, either I know this is local or I don't know. It should be simple to operate on the I don't know by operating with the eventual operator. The decision that E made, and I think the equivalent bindings to ocapn that the swingset kernel has made, the result of the promise for an eventual send does eventually fulfill in an eager manner rather than in a lazy manner. In that case the op:deliver would always be followed by an op:listen

Kris: Yes, I think that's a possible valid language binding. I think particular in JS it would be possible to preserve the distinction and the ergonomics because we do have the .then() method present for explicit intention of intent to preserve

MarkM: It could be, that's exactly the distinction I was drawing between lazy and eager. If interacting with local targets, it's the case it eagerly fulfills. It's a case that the local vs remote oblivious programmer needs to take into account. Not deriving a conclusion for all that, but for all these additional degrees of freedom in the protocol, each language needs to make a choice of what expressivity it provides through default api

Christine: I have a question for Jessica which is do you remember, it's been a while since I worked on the implementation, whether or not sending a message that you use for promise pipelining whether it would fire a op:listen or whether it would avoid that.

Jessica: I think any time in Goblins when you do an eventual send, it will spawn a local promise and resolver pair, and it will export an answer position and if you try to pipeline to that, I think it looks up the answer position for that promise and it will send

Christine: I think that's right and therefore in our case as well as Mark and Kris, the optimization that Kris is specifying is not taken at this time, we just assume that you're going to want the asnwer for whatever your local representation of the promise, but you can imagine a different language that might not request it until its necessary. One simple version is a lazy promise which simply doesn't use op:listen.

Jessica: we don't use op:listen, we use the resolveme descriptor. It's true that you can do an op:listen, but what you usually get back is a local promise, which will be resolved to the value from the remote.

Kris: That's consistent with what we do in JS

Christine: I'm delighted to hear that even if there are more efficient paths available, agoric and spritely have converged on the less efficient path

Kris: I brought up the spec for op:deliver, and I think that you may have answered.... Aaron Kumavis and I were looking over this previously, and I think based on what we discussed I think I can say that the answer position is for one of the four tables and is necessary for being able to pipeline another delivery on the answer, and the resolveme descriptor, I remain a bit mystified. This is a descriptor for import-object or import-promise. In this position they don't reify it, they just refer to it for registering a listener

Jessica: The resolveme descriptor is a registered descriptor

Kris: that you then resolve with fulfill and break of the corresponding object or

Kris: The expectation then is that the receiver of the delivery will op:deliver a fulfill or reject as a function call?

Jessica: Yes, it uses the method convention with the selector of fulfill or break

Kris: I think I understand. I think this conflates two different layers of the architecture in an awkward way but I can see how it works

Christine: Are you saying that because you're surprised the resolver is an object with two possible methods?

Kris: Yes, my expectation would be that captp would have specialized deliveries and would not constrain a shape on the shape of the resolver for the data model

Jessica: This is one of the two places where the method convention, the other is the bootstrap object, is somewhat specified

Markm: In E I never sent a resolver over the protocol, and the reason is that if you just sort of do it... if you create a local promise resolver on the sending side for the result of an eventual send and then you send the resolver as a target, then the side receiving the deliver only has a remote reference to the resolver on the sending side.

Christine: Didn't it use miranda methods to resolve it

MarkM: Miranda methods were send through proxy... for getting the answer there was a redirector which was somewhat different than the resolver... actually I am sorry I am rather shocked at how little of the E protocol I would have

Kris: I regardless would expect an op for resolution. I agree the bootstrap is more common but I'm less concerned about the bootstrap object. In terms of making concrete progress on this issue at a minimum I propose that the union for the resolveme descriptor that you can provide void

Christine: I think that in our case that's why we have two different ops, deliver and deliveronly

Jessica: deliver-only cant be used for promise pipelining

Kris: As written today, there is no way to express that you want to deliver and receive an answer position but then at a future time indicate you want to deliver a pipeline...

Jessica: I'm proposing that we do what you suggest and have it be optionally false, and depricate op:deliver-only, and if you want to do op:deliver-only you just set the last two to false

MarkM: In doing that we'd still have full semantics of deliver-only, including no answer position

Jessica: correct

Christine: I see that Baldur is saying no, which I would be interested in. One reason for deliveronly was the education of an implementer. When we laid out the implementers guide, in E there was a distinction between deliver and deliveronly. It was helpful to me to deliveronly first because then you don't even have to think about anything about promise pipelining and you didn't have to get into imports and export tables. It changes the way we introduce the concepts, it doesn't mean we shouldn't do this, but it would be with providing the implementer where we tell them to ignore these two fields initially.


Jessica: I think you got to what I was going to say which is when you implement this, you could ignore the last two fields and make them false when learning, and not bog the new implmenter down with promise pipelining and etc. But if you remember correctly we immediately ran into the problem that on a brand new connection you can't do anything without op:deliver with a swissnum to deal with the first object

Christine: Criminy I do remember that, it was a big headache. It did create a bit of a problem in terms of the education thing and that does diminish the argument I made substantaily. I don't remember how we solved it.

Baldur: I see three reasons for deliver-only, there's the deliver where you only want to promise pipeline on answer position. When the answer position is missing or false, can also have the optionally the resolve-me descriptor be false or not, depending on whether only using it for promise pipelining.

Kris: I propose for op:get, that I have this group's leave to do op:get instead of op:pick. I will suggest it's sufficient for both field from struct and index for list

Christine: I was going to suggest map but then realized we haven't also answered that

Kris: Ok, then I will take lead on this.

