
# Attendees

- Jonathan Rees (chair)
- Baldur (independent)
- Mark S Miller (Agoric)
- Kris Kowal (Agoric)
- David Thompson (Spritely)
- Zachary Larson (independent)
- Kumavis (Metamask)
- Juliana Sims (Spritely)
- Ridley (independent)

Scribes: David Thompson and Kris Kowal

# Minutes

jar: David and Kris will trade-off scribing this meeting

jar: Any modifications to the agenda?

Kris: No. We can adjust the agenda live if we need to.

# spec: replace positive with non-negative for handoff-count https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/pull/100

jar: I think we've already discussed this.

Kris: I put this on the agenda and I think it would be relatively trivial to close.  David, what do you think?

David: Looks good to me!

jar: There are merge conflicts. Kris can you fix them? After that, you can merge it.

Kris: I’ll resolve the merge conflict and merge.

jar: Next is an issue about op:pick

Kris: op:pick is back from a time where promises could have multiple values.

jar: The issue is closed, why is it on the agenda?

# Propose op:get, op:index, op:untag https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/pull/161

Kris: It is related to the next agenda item about op:get, op:index, and, new to this venue, op:untag.

Dave: Sure (advance topic)

Kris: In a previous version of the spec we had op:pick. The purpose was to pipeline through a specific value of a multi-return/multi-promise. You could pipeline through one of multiple promises. In the absence of that, we'd like to pipeline through a field of a struct, an index of a list, or untag something.

Dave: Can you explain the untagging?

Kris: Tagged values have a single value. op:untag would simply pipeline through to the tagged value within.

markm: I don't love the name op:untag as it sounds imperative but I don't have a suggested alternative. Does it include the tag name?

Kris: Not currently.

MarkM: The value of the tag is only interpretable for a particular tag.  It would be like how if you use op:index on a non-list you'd get an error. If you used op:untag on a differently tagged value, you'd also get an error.

jar: I agree.

David: I agree as well. Is "tagged" established language in the spec?

Kris: Yes. It's orthogonal to CapTP.

David: And we represent them with syrup records?

Kris: Yes.

MarkM: (Dave missed this comment)

Kris: I don't object to requiring the tag name. op:get is duck-typed, and it only fails if the field name is not there. I am fine with the resolution to add the tag. And, if one wants an assertion on the shape of a struct, they can wrap it in a tag and assert the tag.

MarkM: What about a better name? We don't need to bikeshed it now.

Kris: I'm fine with a better name.

(No one comes up with a better name)

Kris: Objections to discussing a name change out of band?

(No objections)

jar: I'd like to get sign-off from 2 reviewers.

MarkM: I saw David's message about "unbox" in Scheme and now I feel better about the name "untag".

Kris: Jessica and David are reviewers.

David: I'll make a note to review this on our side.

# bootstrap methods https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/62

jar: The question I want to ask is: what is the next step on this agenda item?

Kris: I would be seeking a decision on the bootstrap object and its role in CapTP. Right now it is a 3rd party handoff facet and a sturdyref facet combined into one. Do we keep this object or do we sink it into messages in the protocol? The methods could be messages on the protocol layer or a layer above.

Dave: Happy to have a conversation but want Jessica to make a decision. Can we have a brief conversation?

_Scribe’s note: the discussion about crossed-hellos that ensues below proves to be a red-herring, but we should revisit how this mechanism works and where it’s layered in a future meeting._

Mark: You mention crossed-hellos. In E and the way I’ve thought about it ever since, the crossed-hellos are at the top of the vat abstraction. There’s something high that calls low to make a connection. The top of the lower level is (depending on names) just below CapTP provides the invariant that a pair of vats only has one connection.

Dave: Can someone remind me whether there was an op:bootstrap? Did we remove it?

Kris: We did have a conversation about op:bootstrap and I believe we removed it.

Dave: Disregard crossed-hellos.

MarkM: Do we have a spec of what is below CapTP? What do we call it?

Kris: Below the CapTP are the netlayers. I believe we previously agreed that we should have a specification for the interface of netlayers, but no specification yet exists.

MarkM: The thing that we're calling the netlayer. Does that provide the invariant that there is no more than one connection between a pair of vats?

Kris: My understanding is that it is the netlayer's responsibility to ensure that there's only one pairwise connection between a pair of vats.

ridley: I believe that is not in the spec right now.  My understanding is that in the spec, the CapTP layer is responsible for crossed hello mitigation.

MarkM: What makes more sense to me is having crossed hellos as a layer between CapTP and netlayers.

_Scribe’s note: we return to the topic here._

jar: Let's get back to the actual issue. There is no one assigned right now. It would nice to have someone develop it more fully.

Kris: I'll assign it to myself.

jar: Let's get the issues with this written down in the comments, at least.

kumavis: I want to add that I think there's only two places where CapTP is specifying specific type of method invocations. One is on the bootstrap object for sturdyrefs and 3rd party handoffs. The other place is in promise resolvers. Other than that, CapTP does a good job of staying out of specifying calling conventions. If we could get out of that and leave calling conventions to userspace, I think that would be good. I think they should be messages instead of op:delivers.

jar: This should be captured as an issue comment.

Baldur: We wanted to not have as many kinds of messages because bootstrap only happens at the start of the connection, when a sturdyref is being enlivened, or when a handoff happens. We wanted to have some sort of static object, so to speak, that later versions of OCapN could add methods to.

Kris: (Kris fill in your swissnum comment here)

jar: Okay, you just answered my question. This issue is assigned. We're gonna work on this over the next month, offline. Moving on...

# identifying promise and object references https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/101

Kris: Endo with smallcaps provides a layer of abstraction on message bodies that is different than what we have in OCapN. In OCapN, when you refer to a promise or a target, there are particular records for the locally assigned, remotely assigned, answer, whether it's a target, etc. Kumavis is going to point out that this table is incomplete. On the CapTP side, instead of having those ~6 record types in band, we are using slots which have offsets into a separately specified list. The args of a delivery could be transformed without a full parse/reification of the message body. That would allow us to take an unparsed message and hand it off to an internal system to do a mapping of slots. This would be more useful if syrup records had a length prefix but we don't. I propose adopting this proposal for OCapN.

kumavis: Something that hasn't been mentioned is having a... (Dave missed the rest of this)

Kris: We could use a record that designates the slot, and then in the slots list we could have a reference record that designates whether the position was assigned locally or remotely, and whether it's a promise or answer or target.

Dave: Before I say anything else, I missed your comment between Kris’s.

Dave: Where to begin. I don’t know whether I understand this well enough to make a subsansitive comment. The issue is thin. I don’t understand the extent of the proposal. A before and after. Is this to address operator explosion?

Kumavis: I have a question of the text. What does body refer to here.

Kris: I recommend we close this topic with the feedback from Dave and add a more concrete proposal.

kumavis: Happy to co-author/review.

Kris: I'd like to redirect our attention to issue 168 if we have time.

jar: I'd like there to be an assignee for issue 62.

Kris: I'll take it.

# Bug: no way to describe an imported answer promise over the wire https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/168

Kumavis: This is a spec bug. There's one missing way of describing types of objects that can be transferred over the wire. answer-promises are the same thing as promises but their position is specified by the sender of the deliver message. When referring to answers that are local to the receiver, we use desc:answer, but there's no way of referring to them if they ever get sent back. There is no desc:import-answer.

MarkM: When the answer on the receiving side is fulfilled, what happens on the sending side?

Kumavis: The promise is resolved via a resolve-me descriptor. It doesn't refer to the answer, it refers to the resolver. You don't encounter this issue in most trivial setups. I put example code in both JS and Guile for reproducing this issue. What helps clarify is the table of all possible representations and there's just not a way to describe answer-promise for the import side.

MarkM: I think, in E, I also didn't have a way to address the answer when the receiving side of the original message sends the promise back. I don't remember what we did instead.

Kumavis: For Endo CapTP, I also have a table of representations and because slots are just tuples it's easy to see that one possible variant is missing from CapTP. Using slots instead of different types of records makes it an easier, full solution.

Baldur: In E you could name answer positions. One side got the odd numbers, and the other got the even numbers.

MarkM: I'd be interested to refresh our memory on what E does as a point of reference.

Baldur: I think it was called "my answer" in E CapTP and you could also refer to "your answer". I think all possibilities were covered.

Kris: Yeah I think E and Endo cover it and this is simply an omission in our CapTP right now.

kumavis: I have a proposal to address this. Have a descriptor for import-answer. We could have a different proposal that makes all references follow a single record type. One part where it gets more complicated is that they should all be able to appear in 3rd party handoffs. The first issue is that you can't even describe it in the spec today.

Kris: What we can do today is ask Dave if he thinks, loosely, if this an issue at all?  We could address this in stages: add import-answer in the short term and then I can tackle if we can simplify the representation of references in the other issue I'm on the hook for.

Dave: this looks like an omission and I would like Christine and Jessica to form an opinion.

Kumavis: I provided Guile code.

Dave: We can look at this and provide an answer.

Kumavis: I am not looking for a resolution today.


Kris: (assigned issue to Christine)

David: Spritely will take a look at this.

Kris: I am content to punt the topic to next meeting, but we at Endo and Agoric have found an opportunity for OCapN to go back to naming Selectors to Symbols.

Mark: We are making progress on OCapN at Endo. Every time we make a change that impacts code entrenched on our chain, anything we agree to that comes at odds with that presents a tremendous effort to upgrade, but we’re doing it.

# Copy of BBB chat
[19:00] David Thompson: still reading through...
[19:02] David Thompson: well I think we can still discuss op:get
[19:03] David Thompson: I sure wish jessica was here :)
[19:03] kumavis: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/167
[19:03] David Thompson: we could discuss op:listen
[19:05] Baldur: cryptpad?
[19:06] David Thompson: https://cryptpad.fr/code/#/2/code/edit/3QJNL9bs30I+EqDLHHuN08q0/
[19:08] Mark Miller: is anyone uncomfortable with just recording?
[19:08] kumavis: Zachary Larson is listening only but offered to help scribe (in a DM)
[19:09] Zachary Larson: I'll keep a back-up scribe as well ^_^
[19:11] kumavis: im getting clicking sounds from Jonathan
[19:14] kumavis: +
[19:14] Mark Miller: does anyone else hear clicking?
[19:14] Mark Miller: nevermind
[19:15] Mark Miller: yeah, it is jonathan
[19:16] Baldur: Johanatan: there are clicking noises from you
[19:17] Baldur: peels the onion of tagged thing
[19:19] David Thompson: q+
[19:19] Kris Kowal (Agoric): q+
[19:23] Baldur: reminds me, been looking for a TS types to tags in Agoric for the purposes of not repeating type kind of info in two places. (Type declarations and M.ble() matchers)
[19:24] kumavis: "open tagged"
[19:24] Baldur: one of the two hard cs problems: naming things
[19:24] David Thompson: I don't mind the name untag
[19:24] Baldur: detag?
[19:24] David Thompson: we use the term "unbox" in scheme all the time and it doesn't imply effect in that context
[19:25] Zachary Larson: is there a link on that @Jonathan
[19:29] Baldur: U think of the bootstrap object as the NonceLocator fro CapTP of E
[19:29] Baldur: s/U/I/
[19:30] Baldur: q+
[19:31] Jonathan: accidentally closed tab, sorry
[19:31] Baldur: the catbird thing of VatTP?
[19:31] Jonathan: so I may have missed queue requests.  I see Baldur
[19:32] David Thompson: I might be getting confused with op:bootstrap. was there an op:bootstrap??
[19:32] David Thompson: we removed something
[19:34] David Thompson: netlayers??
[19:34] Ridley: not according to spec
[19:34] kumavis: afaik op:bootstrap was replaced with implicit export at 0
[19:35] Baldur: no as I recall
[19:35] David Thompson: I think I've gotten us off topic with the crossed hellos mention
[19:37] David Thompson: we should get back to the actual issue :)
[19:38] Baldur: brb
[19:38] Welcome to OCapN!For help on using BigBlueButton see these (short) tutorial videos.To join the audio bridge click the phone button.  Use a headset to avoid causing background noise for others.To join this meeting by phone, dial:  +1-718-247-9666Then enter 32975 as the conference PIN number.
[19:38] kumavis: q+
[19:38] Baldur: audio back
[19:40] Baldur: there are some additional methods I want to add to the bootstrap object
[19:40] Baldur: q+
[19:40] kumavis: sounds good
[19:41] Kris Kowal (Agoric): q+
[19:43] David Thompson: Kris can you summarize this in the cryptpad? I was behind and I've lost the plot
[19:44] Kris Kowal (Agoric): sure
[19:47] Baldur: reminds me a bit of keyslots in keycalls in keykos
[19:51] Baldur: body and slots are fro Agoric
[19:52] Zachary Larson: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/168
[19:52] Baldur: each message in Agoric is split into body that is json that refers to 'slots' of references passed in the msg
[19:54] Baldur: I had not noticed that spec bug
[19:55] Baldur: q+
[19:59] Kris Kowal (Agoric): q+
[20:03] David Thompson: I have to go now
[20:03] Kris Kowal (Agoric): gotcha
[20:04] David Thompson: can you capture mark's comment about symbols kris?
[20:04] David Thompson: spritely appreciates that effort!
[20:04] Kris Kowal (Agoric): done
[20:05] kumavis: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/167
[20:05] Zachary Larson: 👏
[20:05] Baldur: adjurned!
[20:05] Baldur: cya
[20:05] juli (she/her) (Spritely): thanks y'all
