# November 2025 OCapN pre-standardization meeting, 2025-11-11

## Attendees
- **Chair**: Jonathan Rees
- **Scribe**: Jessica Tallon / Christine Webber
- **Present**:

- Jonathan Rees (Independent)
- Christine Lemmer-Webber (Spritely)
- Jessica Tallon (Spritely)
- Baldur (Independent)
- Ridley (Independent, Dart implementation)
- Richard Gibson (Agoric)
- Kris Kowal (Agoric)

## Minutes

Christine: I'd like to do a surface-level styling of the website to style things, and would like permission to push that forward without it being held up in committee

JAR: Nothing that can't be undone so that sounds like a good idea

Jessica: I also pushed some updates that showed that there have been updates happening in the group

Ridley: does anyone know the status of the Haskell/Rust implementations mentioned on the site?

Jessica: I did look at the Rust one, they did submit some changes to the test suite, etc. It does look like there's work to be done around 3rd party handoffs etc. Haskell one was funded by NLnet, that may have had more

Ridley: I looked on Haskell site

Kris: No objections to updating the website styling etc

## Shipping OCapN release

Christine: There's been a number of us in the group that would like to focus on shipping and interop. We've been around for a while and talked through a number of issues
and made compromises (e.g. symbols and two bottom types). A number of people in the group would like to push towards making a real release. I don't want this to be fully contextualized by the topics we discussed last meeting. We had a very brief discussion about Cap'N Web and if we should pivot to interop with that. I just want to say from Spritely's end, we're not interested in doing that or doing that within this group. Of course, if others would like to do that they're free to do that outside the group. (Speaking personally) I've had challenges in the past in standardization with large corporate ... We've not been focusing on the big issues and what we need to do for interop. We'd like to focus on issues regarding what we need to ship.

Christine: To that end, We'd like to propose a new group for implementers that meets more frequently. Those who attend should be focused on interop work and a prerequisite for contributing to the meetings. This group would still be the monthly meeting where we'd go over major issues, the other group would be focused on getting multiple implementations working together.

Kris: I'm wholly in support of having working groups in addition. I'm not sure I personally have the time, but it'd be great to have others like Kumavis at the meetings. I'm eager to see the progress as well. In short: I agree with Christine.

JAR: Christine, how do you see interaction between monthly meetings and the weekly meetings?

Christine: The implementation meetings things would be happening more loose. There's a certain amount that could be done to geese the wheels to help decisions to be made, we can bring issues to the group to make decisions. I'd also be okay with having more minor decisions (uncontroversial decisions) be made in the weekly. I do think the main meeting deserves some different purposes, the main meeting is where resolutions occur, the WG would be able to geese the wheels by working through the challenges before they're brought to the main group.

Kris: My response is similar. Attendance is constrained. Decisions which change the direction should be brought to the main meeting.

Ridley: I'm working on a Dart implementation. I'd like to have been able to share some of that implementation at this meeting, but I'm not quite ready. I'm in favour of the WG. If we have 3-4 WG meetings to 1 main meeting, we need to think about how capable the main meeting is of handling the resolutions from the WG meetings. Whether that means we strongly encourage people to read specs and issues prior to meeting, or maybe there'll be someone from each implementation who's attending WG and be familiar with all the issues. In short: I am in support of the WG, I don't want us to bottleneck us hard waiting on the main group making decisions.

Jessica: I share what most people have said. In my head I see the divide as being the implementation group is focused on figuring out where the differences are, where the spec is under-specified or is unclear, has problems, or where the test suite may be lacking, and figuring those out and maybe working through those issues and coming to main group with topics or proposals at main meeting... I assume if we'd change the spec in minor or major way, that would require group's buy-in. I think changing implementation guide, test suite, that's less critical, those things come from the spec. But anything changing the spec docs in any way, that requires buy-in of actual group regardless of how big or small it is.

Kris: I agree. I also think that Jessica and I have been given a certain amount of latitude to decide whether or not to bring issues to this group. That's perhaps the basis of the compromise to allow us to move forward. Some issues are editorial in nature. We can also queue up some issues to be reviewed. We can also bring up some issues towards plenary meeting. In any case, I am not terribly worried.

Ridley: I just wanted to say that perhaps I came off a big strong. I mostly want everyone to agree on what is the nature of the relationship between the two groups rather than force my own opinion.

Kris: No no, it didn't come off strong.

JAR: I liked where Kris said the monthly meeting should still be responsible for closing issues. That has a nice continuity to it, and issues can be closed quickly if handled within github issues and good prep done.

Ridley: I have a proposal.  I propose that implementers group, one of goals, if there's discussion that needs to be changed, I'm not sure minutes are necessary but that we have a summary in the github issue for the thing, so when we do come together, then we can say the implementers have explored this in some detail rather than here's the intro to the issue.

JAR: Yes, many times I have said here we should be exploiting Github issues to explore work outside the meeting. That's my opinion.

Christine: Yes I agree with everyone else on how it should work.

Kris: With that I would like to move the topic as resolved to schedule a working group of approximately weekly cadence. I'd like to talk about how to triage issues to bring to this meeting in the future, so we can bring the issues that need to be ratified to be approved. And then talk about how to de-risk the evolution of the protocol, so we can consider the issues of how to go ahead. I see Jessica in the chat is asking whether we need to suggest times in this meeting, I think we need to propose we move that out of meeting.

JAR: We need a convener.

Christine: A reasonable thing would be to make an issue and propose an initial time. I'd propose weekly on friday's at the same time this (main) meeting occurs. This would be an initial straw proposal that people could say yes or not.

Baldur: Conflicts with FRIAM.

Christine: What about we meet every week on tuesdays at the same time as the main meeting. The weeks we have the main meeting there won't be a WG.

ACTION: Jessica to make an issue about this.

Christine: We said it at the beginning, but it's worth putting down that this is not an implementer group for Cap'N Web issues, nor is the main meeting. If someone wants to work towards that with Cap'N Web, they can outside the group, this group has enough work.

Ridley: I agree. I don't personally wish to move in that direction, I'd be disappointed if we changed the current spec significantly to accommodate that. I'm very hesitant to work with a large company on this.

Christine: #208. Difficult to assess while reading in the meeting, but there's one thing obvious to talk about - Noise protocol. I'm not very familiar, what layer would this go into?

Kris: I'm proposing we add a specific netlayer. We've spoken about having a meta-netlayer (a proposal I agree with). This would be a meta-netlayer.

Christine: This looks pretty good at first glance. I'll repeat back to check my understanding: You're not saying this will be **the** netlayer, this would be a netlayer that'd be for shipping? This might be a bit of a side think from our roadmap.

Kris: If you were transmitting over websocket they'd be binary messages that would be encrypted. When they are decrypted they'd reveal syrup. I'm putting forth Noise protocol as a specific concrete idea, other protocols would meet the need for de-risking the roadmap. We need to be able to put off needing to ratify permanently syrup and the virtue of de-risking this early, we could begin to interop. We'd be more enthusiastic about embracing syrup now.

Ridley: As an overall idea / proposal - I'm mostly onboard. It makes sense we'd support protocol evolving. I'm concerned about having to support absolutely everything to interop, sometimes that can happen. I've also been thinking of e2ee encrypted relay netlayers and have my own notes on the topic. One thing to bring up is, I'd like to support store and forward relays. This would allow someone on a mobile decide to receive a message even when offline. The way in which to make that work would require we change how to start sessions. (wrt: Noise protocol): If we feel like we can async message a peer without an op:start-session ??? we can talk about this more another time. This might fit in with Kris' Noise protocol proposal.

Kris: There's a specific point I'd like to respond to. For one, I do think we should converge on (two?) syntaxes, if this is unpalatable - we should decide that before V1. I'm suggesting we can negotiate within a small range of versions, but not an open-ended range of versions. These are things we should discuss. I'm deeply sympathetic to not having to implement everything, if we can have one encoding that's required to interop that'd be ok.

Christine: We're close to the end of the meeting, we've had great discussions today. Regarding what ridley brought up about not requiring an initial handshake with both parties being online - This is a great thing to work through in the implementer group - I don't have an opinion yet, but I'd form one when we sit down and talk about it. I'm excited to talk about this.

Ridley: I'm not sure how easy this is to pull off, I'd like to explore this with others.

Kris: I'm enthusiastic about nailing down a specific netlayer to do e2ee over multiple protocols. I'd like to end this meeting with consensus on how to triage issues for V1.

Christine: I don't think we have time with 2 minutes left.

Kris: Okay, lets continue this next meeting.

Christine: I'm grateful you put this issue together, it's good framing.

Ridley: Kris, this proposal: Am I understanding if you used HTTPS, it'd add an extra layer of encryption.

Kris: Yes over HTTPS or tor they'd be an extra layer of encryption. I'm not a cryptographer but Brian suggested it and I have implemented a Noise protocol and got it to work. My understanding doesn't reach to store-and-forward yet, but interested in that conversation.
