# Attendees

* Baldur (independent)
* Christine Lemmer-Webber (Spritely)
* David Thompson (Spritely)
* Erik Marks (MetaMask)
* Jessica Tallon (Spritely)
* Jonathan Rees (chair)
* Juli
* Kris Kowal (Agoric)
* kumavis (MetaMask)
* Ridley (independent)
* Mark Miller (Agoric)
* Richard Gibson (Agoric)

# Agenda

**Old business:**
#168 / PR #171 desc:import-answer "have to think about it more"
PR #104 TCP testing netlayer.  awaiting review.  assigned to @kriskowal 
#62 bootstrap object - long discussion, resolution unclear.  assigned to @kriskowal 
#167 op:deliver - ready to merge?  assigned to @tsyesika 
PR #190 unix domain socket netlayer - high level overview?  ready to merge?  assigned to @davexunit
Lazy promises discussed in July (new issue please?) - enhancement - awaiting Christine's status report - see https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/blob/main/meeting-minutes/2025-07-08.md
#172 Passable data - not clear how this long discussion ended?  See July 2025 minutes.  Need assignee or close

**New business:**
#101 promise references - on agenda several times but never discussed
#183 perimeter types - @tsyesika 
Authentication of peers ("dialback"?) - @tsyesika - issue number ?
#182 web site is outdated

# Minutes

JAR: Procedure: I went over old meetings going back to June and populated the agenda with old business. By Robert‚Äôs Rules they stay on the agenda until done. I do not with to discuss all of these, but to ensure that there are assignees and clarity on next steps.

* [Bug: no way to describe an imported answer promise over the wire. #168](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/168)

  Jessica: I have looked at this deeper and believe a wire delta will solve the problem.
  
  Christine: I have thought about this as well. I have enough information to discuss this. It will be helpful to have Mark sanity check as we go through.
  
  The side that produces answers does not put the answer in arguments.
  There is a suggestion that we can allow that by using reference counts to make questions and answers more like imports and exports.
  Questions and answers avoid dependency cycles.
  
  Jessica: Would like Christine to go into the dependency cycle.

  Christine: I have notes and an example workflow.
  
  JAR: We are doing more technical than I would like.
  
  Baldur: It‚Äôs a question about desc:import-answer that is when the answer of a question, the one who proposed the question, is referring to something using the index into their own answers table. That has issues. If the questioner ‚Ä¶the issue is that GC‚Ä¶the questioner decides to allocate the question and answer identifier in that direction. When can they drop the local proxy just to tell the other end ‚ÄúI‚Äôm done with this?‚Äù.
  
  Kris: I propose this be the first topic after flushing old business.

  JAR: seconds.
  
  JAR: I am concerned about complicated discussions outside of the meeting and Github comments. Interesting things should make their way to a Github comment.
  
* [Propose TCP Netlayer #104](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/104)

  Jessica: This netlayer is implemented in Goblins and the PR describes the implementation.
  
  Kris: I will review this.
  
* [#62 bootstrap object - long discussion, resolution unclear.  assigned to @kriskowal](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/62)
  
   I will bring this back at a later time.
   
* [#167 op:deliver - ready to merge?  assigned to @tsyesika](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/167)

   Jessica: I have not reviewed this. I do not recall whether we have consensus on the final shape.
   I believe Christine is correct that we can split this issue up.
   We could split out op:listen and separately drop the resolve-me-desc.
   
   JAR: Do you wish to get consensus?
   
   Jessica: I am looking for a group decision and then will review.
   
   Christine: I think that the deliver vs deliver-only is a simple conversation that does not change semantics.
   Whether to include the resolve-me-desc in deliver is more complex.
   I am strongly in favor of splitting.
   We could settle deliver vs deliver-only quickly.
   
   Jessica: +1 to splitting. I agree. Let‚Äôs enqueue deliver vs deliver-only for this meeting and discuss ejecting op:listen later.
   
* [PR #190 unix domain socket netlayer - high level overview?  ready to merge?  assigned to @davexunit
Lazy promises discussed in July (new issue please?) - enhancement - awaiting Christine's status report - see 
](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/blob/main/meeting-minutes/2025-07-08.md)

  David: I did review this and gave it an editorial pass. Agoric should review.
  
  Jessica: I finished last meeting asking everyone to review and come back to a group discussion.
  
  Kris: I propose that we put this topic at the top of a future agenda.
  
JAR: I would like an issue created for decoupling op:listen and op:deliver.

MarkM: When you say traditional computer science meaning of ‚Äúlazy‚Äù, do you mean ‚Äúthe operation produces a promise, lazy means that bob does not act on the message until the sender indicates interest.‚Äù

Christine: I am acknowledging that we already proffess that ‚Äúlazy‚Äù is the wrong term and we were close to ‚Äúdeferred listening‚Äù.

MarkM: The resolution is lazy.

JAR: We do have technical material. I would just like an issue.

Kris: I volunteer to find the issue or create one.

Christine: One of our other action items is that this will be a consequence of other work.

# [Bug: no way to describe an imported answer promise over the wire. #168](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/168)

Christine: I‚Äôve typed up an explainer of my understanding of this but I worry we do not have enough time. I will give my best shot.

Christine: In order to be neutral, I‚Äôm attempting to capture in E syntax. The general problem is we have import and export tables and question and answer tables. The question is whether or not we should be using an incremental counter for question and answer just as import and export. The second is whether we should be able to refer to a question on the wire.

(diagram and explanation of scenario to be captured)
  
Kumavis: I was merely surpised that question is ineffable. Endo CapTP can mention questions (q-1).

MarkM: Promises are not obligated to be ‚Äúeq‚Äù, so we do not need to guarantee ‚Äúeq‚Äù when promoting a desc:question to an desc:import-promise. There are various ways that matching promises would be problematic.

Kris: In summary, the crux of this issue is that we do not need to express desc:question on the wire because in all cases we can translate to the equivalent desc:import-promise, which may result in the other peer getting another promise for the same eventual fulfillment, but this is tolerable because promises are not required to be identical in the distributed semantcs.

Kumavis: I am satisfied but want to learn more about why promises do not need to grant-match.


# Copy of BBB chat:

[18:45] [Baldur : VIEWER]: seems to be working
[18:56] [Baldur : VIEWER]: huh, cap-lore.com seems to have lapsed
[18:59] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: tjena
[19:01] Christine Lemmer-Webber is now the presenter
[19:01] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: we need a cryptpad
[19:01] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: and scribe I guess
[19:02] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: https://cryptpad.fr/code/#/2/code/edit/qvPRoDeUMFS7JEWPKUlUBnDV/
[19:02] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: who scribed last?
[19:02] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: I never remember
[19:03] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: oh right I wasn't here for the last one lol
[19:04] [kumavis : VIEWER]: can anyone hear me
[19:04] [ridley : VIEWER]: no
[19:08] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: what calendar is being referenced here?
[19:08] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I'm confused
[19:09] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I usually refrain based on not liking being on camera
[19:09] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I don't like being on microphone either, but that seems less feasible üòä
[19:09] [Baldur : VIEWER]: for me its the mess in my background
[19:11] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: sounds good to me
[19:12] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/193
[19:12] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: I have put together notes, I hope, to try to prepare for the import/export question/answer discussion
[19:14] [Baldur : VIEWER]: link to said Signal group?
[19:14] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: someone who is better at signal than me will have to figure out how to get the link
[19:15] [Baldur : VIEWER]: +q
[19:18] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: sounds reasonable
[19:18] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: sounds good
[19:19] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I share that, I feel like the group should be open
[19:19] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: +1
[19:19] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I don't like the idea of backroom chats
[19:19] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: by "signal group" do we mean ouroboros?
[19:19] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: backchannels are helpful but tricky for doing actual standards work in üòä
[19:19] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: we do yeah
[19:19] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: ^ mark
[19:20] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: and it's implemented in the test suite
[19:22] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: yep
[19:24] [ridley : VIEWER]: yep
[19:24] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: +1 to deferring
[19:25] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: it's not urgent
[19:26] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: I think it's good to separate these questions
[19:26] [ridley : VIEWER]: yes please
[19:26] [Baldur : VIEWER]: jessica:  my Signal handle @zarutian.45
[19:26] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: yes the former is a much easier conversation
[19:27] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: +1 to splitting
[19:27] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: +1
[19:27] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: please
[19:29] [ridley : VIEWER]: Is anyone opposed to getting rid of op:deliver-only?
[19:29] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: y
[19:29] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: as in, y, I think I'm opposed
[19:30] [ridley : VIEWER]: okay, hadn't recalled hearing opposition yet
[19:30] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I'm not sure why it's assigned to dave
[19:31] [Baldur : VIEWER]: /me didnt do his homework
[19:31] [ridley : VIEWER]: There was a discussion of encryption previously. Was that added to the issue
[19:31] [ridley : VIEWER]: ?
[19:32] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I'm assuming it's a whole meeting topic
[19:32] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: do you remember any more specifics for that, ridley?
[19:32] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: which "lazy" do you mean?
[19:33] [Baldur : VIEWER]: aah, now I recall!
[19:33] [ridley : VIEWER]: I'm fuzzy on it but Mark was advocating strongly that the unix domain socket netlayer be encrypted such that the introduction server can't intercept
[19:34] [Baldur : VIEWER]: its for when something does a E.when(promise, handler) or (on promise ...)
[19:34] [Jonathan : VIEWER]: Hmm... just wanted an issue for this
[19:34] [kumavis : VIEWER]: lazy vs eager, here about subscribing to promises
[19:34] [Baldur : VIEWER]: only do op:listen then
[19:34] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: yeah let's not go too deep into this rn
[19:35] [Baldur : VIEWER]: intrested vs non-intrested
[19:35] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I strongly have a preference not to discuss terms too much at this time
[19:36] [ridley : VIEWER]: ya
[19:36] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: thanks kris
[19:36] [ridley : VIEWER]: yay
[19:38] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: just for reference: http://erights.org/elib/distrib/captp/index.html section "The Descriptors"
[19:38] [Baldur : VIEWER]: +q to resume what he knows about how to workaround the gc issue
[19:39] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: +1
[19:39] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: now I know that I have visuals. I see it
[19:40] [Jonathan : VIEWER]: I see baldur on the queue, but would like him to wait until there's a natural break... if it remaiins relevant
[19:41] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: that might be a stale raised hand
[19:41] [Baldur : VIEWER]: think Christine is getting at what was going to explain
[19:41] [Baldur : VIEWER]: but I made a comment in the issue that proposes a workaround that should work for the purposes kumavis wanted
[19:45] [Baldur : VIEWER]: in github issue #168
[19:45] [Kris Kowal : VIEWER]: (I am not attempting to capture this discussion in the notes)
[19:46] [Jonathan : VIEWER]: Maybe we can get christine to contribute the code to the minutes
[19:46] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: (whoever was tying, please mute while typing)
[19:47] [Erik Marks : VIEWER]: kumavis with the phone mic maybe?
[19:47] [Mark Miller : VIEWER]: "knot" or "not"?
[19:47] [Baldur : VIEWER]: +q
[19:49] [Baldur : VIEWER]: the b side can re-export it?
[19:51] [Kris Kowal : VIEWER]: E Proxy = OCapN Target
[19:53] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I believe this came out of a requirement? iirc
[19:54] [Baldur : VIEWER]: E Proxy is the half circle representive of an remote (eventual) object
[19:56] [Baldur : VIEWER]: B side makes a promise resolver pair before dispatching the invocation locally
[19:56] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: what if it's unresolved?
[19:56] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I guess desc:import-promise?
[19:56] [ridley : VIEWER]: yes
[19:57] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: I have a question for kumavis, did this come from a specific use case?
[19:57] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: (and if so, what was that use case)
[19:58] [Baldur : VIEWER]: Mark: ya reffering to the rdr part of an deliverOp in E I presume. I had an idea of supporting the equiv of passing in an /dev/null equiv as the tdr
[19:59] [Baldur : VIEWER]: #168
[20:00] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: q-1 it looks like
[20:01] [ridley : VIEWER]: Maybe I'm missing something but I have yet to understand any need to add a new descriptor here.
[20:01] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: promise eq you mean?
[20:02] [ridley : VIEWER]: it causes problems
[20:02] [ridley : VIEWER]: (I spent far too much time thinking about promises lately)
[20:03] [Baldur : VIEWER]: As in Squeak/SmallTalk80 become: btw
[20:03] [Erik Marks : VIEWER]: There was a meeting earlier this summer where we enumerated many of the reasons why promises may not be referentially equal even though they have the same fulfillment value
[20:04] [ridley : VIEWER]: The simplest example would be if you fulfill a promise with a promise. Two ids but one result.
[20:04] [Baldur : VIEWER]: kriskowal wants to edge in I think
[20:05] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: yes
[20:05] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: hm
[20:05] [Kris Kowal : VIEWER]: +1 to summarize and wrap
[20:05] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: yeah we're overtime
[20:05] [Kris Kowal : VIEWER]: I mean q+ to summarize and wrap.
[20:05] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: but hey I managed to get through my presentation!
[20:05] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: I  didn't think   I could
[20:05] [Kris Kowal : VIEWER]: I think we got to the end.
[20:05] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: christine, can you drop this document in the minutes (if you haven't)
[20:06] [ridley : VIEWER]: It might not be in there
[20:06] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: as Kevin Reid once observed, there's a reason a valid pronunciation  for "eq" is "eek"
[20:06] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: once you know what it is
[20:06] [ridley : VIEWER]: agreed
[20:07] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: excellent summary!
[20:07] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: I have to go!
[20:07] [Christine Lemmer-Webber : MODERATOR]: excellent meeting!
[20:08] [Erik Marks : VIEWER]: Likewise, cheers
[20:09] [ridley : VIEWER]: might not be
[20:10] [Baldur : VIEWER]: MarkM: before I forget cap-lore.com seems to have lapsed
[20:11] [Kris Kowal : VIEWER]: Good to see you all folks! Til next time.
[20:12] [juli (she/her) : VIEWER]: thank y'all; see ya next time
[20:12] [Jessica Tallon (she/her) : VIEWER]: +1 from me
[20:12] [ridley : VIEWER]: bye all
[20:12] [David Thompson : VIEWER]: bye!
