# Attendees

- Jonathan Rees (chair)
- Christine Lemmer-Webber
- David Thompson
- Kris Kowal
- Mark Miller
- Dan Connoly
- Joshua Corbin
- Ridley
- Richard Gibson

# Minutes

## [Issue 268](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/268) -- Gen AI Usage Policy

* cwebber -- intro framing, mostly focusing on cognititve debt, not so much the slop/vibe/copyright angle
* markm -- analogy question to spellcheck and autocomplete
* cwebber -- "line is drawn at authoring the creative work"
* kris -- "the finest line you drew was no tools after Nov 2025?"
* cwebber -- "not literally 'freeze $EDITOR', more like the 'how' you're doing it"
* kris -- "story about inflatable gorillas as a marketing ploy? ... how do we measure if someone is in violation tho?"
* cwebber -- this is in fact a valid instance of "we know it when we see it", not to be tehnicaly rules-lawyered
* markm -- aligend with the deciion be spiritually based
* jcorbin -- +1 anti rules-lawyering

Next Step: draft a proposed formal policy for next time?
- prior is directionally right, but say more about "author(ing)" and "creative"
- a PR from cwebber to be forthcoming

## [Issue 265](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/265) -- 3PH Two Generals Problem

*note* missing kumavis, but can have a cursory convo notwithstanding

Re: ridley, should be able to close?

* jross -- where are we at?
* ridley -- this specific issue happened during promise shortening, but we asked if we needed to broaden to 2 generals, turns out no, proposed we can close
* markm -- who are the 2 generals anyhow?
* ridley -- if the deposite never arrived at the exporter, there would be waiting forever, but this is not the case due to needing to have a session, which will notify correctly
* markm -- wants to getaround2 talking about some other 3-party thing with targets, but need baldur

Resolved: close

## ???

* jross -- chair discretion: how close are we to 'done'?
* danc -- 4-5 implementations, which is materially different form 1.5, may in fact be time for celebration
* markm -- interop?
* davidt -- yes
* cwebber -- yes, but all/most have been "X and Guile", would be great to get more coverage
* kris -- celebration is warrented when we have 3PH confidence and when we have a production crypto netlayer and concrete represtnation stability/consensus
* cwebber -- we are quite far along wrt spec and test suite, does in fact seem like "Is Real Thing" -- biggest thing missing is Authentication -- seems to be some ability to spoof or lie about who you are
* kris -- yes, solving authn is at least 1 leg of what I mean, my understanding is that is a netlayer concern
* cwebber -- see more separation, even if they interelate
* markm -- re olde relative routing talk?
* cwebber -- yes, that did seem right, even if I didn't quite get the point half as well as should've liked to
* markm -- reason/relevance : Kris notion that a netowrk is an equiv class where grant matching equality is possible ; but I think relative routing gets us that somehow over heterogenous substrates
  - proceeded to give some multi-entity example verbally that this transcriber is going to decline to even reproduce here
* cwebber -- if we are going to make a decision to handle 'this' in a non-meta way, esp having a unified netlayer above other substrates, then we'd definitely want to do relative routing
  - another complicated verbal/technical example that the transcriber elides
* jross -- umm, what *are* we doing here? milestones? consensus? circling back to 'done wen'
* cwebber -- yes so salient questions to resolve:
  1. *what do we want to achive* -- do we want/need/encourage : no matter which netlayer you use, ensure grant matching eq end-to-end?
  2. *how we get there* -- if so how do we want to do that, e.g. the "meta" netlayer tapped above
* kris -- does in fact have a desire for such matching especially in a way that works off the web
* jross -- right so let's sort out some kinda leaderboard, so we can define milestones, rather than carry on technicals here so much?

Chat broadly agreed to agree upon a plan as the next step here.

https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/272 towards https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/milestone/2

