# Attendees

- JAR (chair)
- Mark Miller
- Kris Kowal
- Dave Thompson
- Ridley
- Baldur
- Jessica Tallon

# Minutes



JAR: What is the meaning of the milestone.

Dave: Confetti rain. In all seriousness, I have a similar question. There are community standards and licensing documents (https://github.com/CommunitySpecification/Community_Specification). Is this what we are shooting for? We should of course have some fanfare. Active encouragement to use it. What do other folks have in mind.

Kris: My hope for this milestone is to obviate all regrettable design decisions and have a version of the spec that commits to no further breaking changes such that all subsequent amendments are additions with no further subtractions. That means preparing, to the extent possible, for evolution.

Dave: Yes. No further breaking changes is good.

Jessica: Yes, for 1.0 we are asking implementers to implement and we are not asking people to change things under their feet. If we are, there would be a major version change. There will be a lot more work within the group regarding netlayers and perhaps layers on top of OCapN. So, I think we can add new netlayers that people can choose to implement or not. It is possible we want to support debugging in a way that would be inappropriate to add to CapTP as well as more types that are not in the base standard. I suspect that we would want to continue after 1.0.

Dave: Regarding netlayers, do we want to commit to some small set as part of this milestone.

Kris: Yes, at least one.

Dave: Ok.

Jessica: I agree. It probably wants to be something like WebSocket that easy for most implementations to speak. I am curious about browsers because they are so limited for peer to peer. I don’t want to hold up on the relay but I think it’s important. I am keep for people to use a proper peer to peer even though relays are not as peer to peer as we would like. It is more peer to peer than a server with control and not speaking to other clients.

Dave: I guess we should be careful because it could hold up a 1.0. I agree it would be nice to have.

Jessica: I don’t think we need to hold up 1.0 on the relay netlayer. I am just aware that without browsers we don’t have a large ecosystem. We design the spec such that you can add netlayers. This group can standardize. Here’s p2p, &c. I am not too worried. I don’t think they have to all be in place for 1.0.

Dave: agree

Ridley: In terms of milestones, I think it is helpful to state what we belive means done. I do not feel it is wise to commit to limiting the commitments to the list. We find that we find more issues was we settle others as we develop and it would be good to be able to address them.

JAR: I don’t feel that is going to be a danger but I totally agree. I brought up the question what happens after rather than what happens before. We have tried to capture the milestone, but saying what is…why are we doing this? Maybe that is too strong. I am thinking aobut publication and disemination. I have been following cap-talk and maybe that’s the forum to aim for because a message there would get the document a lot of review quickly and probably end up causing it to be propagated to other places. That is my thought. If we could vaguely say this is a publication or announcement milestone, that would be one way to move on.

Mark: 1.0, are we taking that to convey a strong expectation that future revisions will be compatible with 1.0? Obviously not absolute, but is it the threshold? I expect it to be a threshold: that compatibility is going forward.

Kris: My expectation is forward compatibility including grant matching.

Mark: How much have we discussed protocol evolution?

JAR: I think that’s a good question. I wish to caution against going too deep before we get to the milestone. The milestone doesn’t cover the consequence of the milestone. I am not sure I fully understood what you’re saying.

Mark: Let me clarify. My concern is that there are several choices that I have not spent contesting like Syrup vs CBOR, I don’t want to get stuck with Syrup, while communicating whether we have a commitment…

JAR: My picture is that would be explored in an issue or the implementer call or meeting time. That feels like an aspect of the milestone. The milestone will have however many issues that all have to be resolved to say we have reached the milestone. If we have agreement that we have to resolve the issue it’s reasonable that is in the milestone and then from the viewpoint of process that has to be addressed.

Mark: I understand.

JAR: That said, if everyone is happy with this discussion of what does the milestone mean we can move on to start picking issues and addressing them and maybe do some triage. I haven’t thought of today’s agenda apart from this question. For me, I was hiding the question of where do we announce.

Mark: I do like CapTalk among others.

JAR: If it gets on CapTalk it will get around.

Dave: Spritely would post on BlueSky and the Fediverse.

JAR: I want there to be clarity about the effect of the milestone. So, I think that’s clear.

Kris: I propose a motion that the criterion for inclusion in the milestone is that these are the issues that must be addressed before broadly advertising the readiness of the specification for broad implementation, so all issues that the group wishes to be resolved before should be included, and no issues that can be resolved after.

Mark: Yes.

JAR: As far as I am concerned the first question is answered by this resolution.

*no comments or objections*

---

JAR: For the rest of the agenda, tell me if you disagree, as far as we need to discuss for 272 there are sort of two questions: what should be in the list. Then, if we don’t want to talk about that we need to talk about particular issues. I will take…if that’s what we’re doing next, I don’t know where to start. Should we talk about 272 or what’s in the list? Are there points that require attention, dispute, or consensus and peace?

Ridley: As far as I can tell, we have not seen Spritely attention on the list. I am curious if there are additional items.

Jessica: I have just gotten back from leave but the list looks good and includes things we care about like peer authentication. We are mostly thinking mostly about the encrypted relay. So, I don’t think there’s anything… Do you know of anything Dave?

JAR: I know this is a difficult question to answer, but I had a hope it was reviewed ahead-of-time.

Dave: I have not really done my homework and reviewed everything, but I do like what I see so far. Jessica you mentioned…errors are actually here already.

Jessica: I think there are two parts to errors that they are under-specified (and not fit-for-purpose) and the other that we need to leave space to evolve errors and I do not know what the shape of that is.

Dave: In that case, I think there is one that should be added: errors do not fully encompass debugging. We need to be sure instrumentation and monitoring are possible. So, maybe I will go looking for whether there’s an existing or whether we need a new one. I know Kris discussed a way we could evolve without spec changes.

JAR: I am looking at the list and we have no way to differentiate nominated from consensus. I am finding that puzzling. Not all but many of the issues in the milestone have a tag for nomination. The milestone is supposed to be consensus that they belong. So, I am trying to figure out which ones are nominations and which have consensus for belong in the milestone.

Dave: It sounds we have rough consensus that all are reasonable to have in the milestone. Would it help if the label is changed?

JAR: You can tell me inclusion in the milestone reflects consensus. In that case how are we reaching consensus? I am happy saying what our process for reaching consensus is?

Dave: We can entertain a question what the process is? We have nominations and no objections.

JAR: That means these issues were in the list before we got to consensus. We have not been explicit. If you’re saying let’s look at the list, do we have consensus on this list that may not be complete but are necessary? Is that the current consensus and we can have that recorded. Then we can have a process for adding issues.

Dave: Sounds reasonable to me.

Kris: To be clear, we have a question of how we achieve consensus. There is a summary way of doing it where we propose a motion in this meeting, whether the nominations are necessary or not for the milestone but we have conversations for anything that would be added. The non-summary way would be go back and review each of these and see if the issues are sufficiently detailed. I think the summary approach is sufficient and I move that we vote on proceeding under those terms.

JAR: I agree and we are calling for objections, and…hearing none, this is our finish line candidate. I don’t think we should say it is frozen for all time becaause that is not realistic but it is a great starting point.

Dave: I agree.

JAR: For future changes there should be nominations and add them to the agenda. Adding to the list would be confusing. I think it would be less confusing to put them on the agenda. And, so far these meetings are the way to get consensus, does that make sense?

Dave: Yes.

Kris: I propose that we capture the list as it is today on the record and that we add a label to each issue indicating that consensus was reached and remove the nomination label from them. That label can be used for future nominations.

JAR: We'll need a volunter for that.

Kris: I volunteer.

JAR: Sounds great. Good. So, as far as I am concerned that covers the meta question of the milestone itself. Any objections to moving on?

Kris: Dan Connolly sent me with feedback that this milestone, he feels that we are approaching this from the wrong direction. Instead of deciding what is in 1.0, we should decide *when* 1.0 and cut when we've reached a particular time. I bring this up but I think it's clear that's not the direction we are going.

MarkM: I would object to that direction.

JAR: I like it but we don't have dedicated resources to bring it about.

Kris: With that I have no objection to moving on.

---

JAR: I am looking at the list. We do not have to restrict discussion to this list, but. This is in chronological order. I will leave a minute for someone to bring up urgency for an implementation and go to the oldest.

Dave: I suggest that Ridley is part of grant work on peer authentication that may be a pressing issue to discuss further. I won’t speak for Ridley but that is my suggestion.

Ridley: Certainly something I would like to see progress on but not sure we have time to make progress. That’s an option. Another is that we have a pull request for promise shortening that needs feedback other than folks being on board and it needs review.

JAR: I have been uneasy about the pull request list which is getting long.

Jessica: I will just make a comment that I will review before next week’s implementer call. #277. And, I suggest that we (might not help totally because email slips) perhaps a PR should be assigned when ready for review.

Jessica: That’s a valid assumption that I find it easier when assigned.

JAR: We don’t have a clean process for pull request review. As chair I don’t know what to do.

Kris: I volunteer Mark to review #277 before the implementer call since someone from Endo/Agoric should review and I am a subjectmatter expert.

JAR: Is there something I can do to move pull requests. I can find out what can be merged without much attention.

Kris: My understanding of the process is that anything can be merged if Jessica and I both approve.

Jessica: That is my recollection. One old PR is the UNIX domain socket. Only Dave has reviewed that. If anyone has spare time they can offer to review, I would like that.

JAR: Perhaps we can have a volunteer.

Dave: Anyone have interest in reviewing? Otherwise we’ll take anyone.

Kris: Not to derail the request for a reviewer, something I believe would be useful would be to classify our PRs by whether they are substantiated by one of the issues in the milestone.

JAR: I'm checking and it's not something be called for in the milestone. That's not a strike against it, but we so far haven't found a reason to move it in there.

Jessica: That is correct that it is not motivated by the milestone. I would appreciate it if someone has time but do not want to take time from the group over more pressing issues.

JAR: This PR needs a comment to express its status, which I can do or someone else can. I am going to go over all the PRs and will comment on each with regard to my undrestanding of what’s going on. Jessica, please feel free to comment and I will if you don’t. I have been wanting to talk about PRs for a while. We may have sections of pull requests, the document committed to Github that we may want to remove from the finish line. Is that theoretcially possible at this point?

Kris: I think it is possible. It is worth an audit.

JAR: We will deal with that when the time comes. I wonder if these focus pull requests should be acclerated. Like, sturdy references. This is to the data model, not to the implementation. Can we merge this? #227. Very similar is #248.

Ridley: We have discussed this at the implementer call recently. I felt the PR contained significant JavaScript specific notes and should not be for a spec we want in many languages.

JAR: This is #248 to close #142, which remains open. We can leave this open and maybe Tuesday group or anyone else can weigh in on this.

Dave: This one needs further review.

Kris: Let’s put it on the agenda for implementer call and next plenary.

Mark: I want to make a point about the emphasis on JavaScript. This does not apply the phraseology, but I want to remind everyone, when we founded the group I made the point that systems that try to be language-neutral are basically defining the semantics of an ad hoc language that is not well-adapted to any implementation language, which is not atuned to any implementation, whereas something mostly language-neutral to be especially convenient for one of the participating languages, where it is JavaScript, makes it especially convenient for that without being less convenient than the others. That’s my sense of things at looking at many language-neutral protocols. And, we have done that several times and with regard to Agoric’s use of of effectively passables in the abstract is the same from OCapN deviates, there’s an attractor there, and if … the reason I raise this in particular with regard to errors I think JavaScript errors, there is a very language-neutral thing we can specify with a few special-cases, by reserving a few names doesn’t make sense for a language-neutral protocol, but helps make the protocol especially convenient for JavaScript. I want to make sure we are on the same page that we can bend toward JavaScript if we don’t bent far everywhere else.

Ridley: I want to clarify that I am not proposing a technical change, but just it makes a bad specification if we have paragraphs dedicated to a single language implementation.

Mark: I think that’s fine and I am fine with that. I just want to make sure we are on the same page with regard to what we seek to standardize.

Ridley: In general my approach is to do what is best for everyone. I hestiate to lean too hard on what’s best for JavaScript.

Mark: I am saying that we bend where it makes hard for JavaScript to participate. For example I hate the coëxistence of null and undefined, but I don’t think EndoJS could participate without accomodating null and undefined. If we can’t bend in some cases, Endo would have to drop out.

Jessica: I think I missed. There was a meeting in 2021 and it could have missed. I don’t recall such a discussion in any meeting we have attended and we should be aiming to be language-neutral. I think we should not prefer any language. I do think there is something that makes it difficult in a certain language, that’s great feedback for the group. If we can accommodate without significant sacrifies, we should discuss. I want it to be as widely implemented as possible. I don’t want the group to make a decision that precludes implementation. If that’s the framing, I would disagree.

Mark: With regard to null and undefined is a sufficiently clear precedent. With regard to errors, I am going to ask all property names to be treated uniformly except `message`, `stack`, and `name`. The reason is these carves outs make it especially easy for JavaScript implementation. Being uniform except those names should impose no trouble for other implementations unless they are reserved already.

Dave: A quick note is that in isolation none of those changes are onerous but in aggregate, the null and undefined, particular about errors, my concern is that it makes a difficult-to-implement spec for everybody.

Mark: Perhaps that is true. When we look at the total compromises in aggregate I might well agree. But, it’s quite often that when something goes to standarization after entrenched use and with regard to Endo its essentially mandatory continued support of Agoric which makes use of these distributed object semantics and Endo being promoted as an ocap substrate for programmers in general, I think we need to weigh the aggregate pain (and I agree it may or may not be more than I expect) once we know, we should weigh against Endo needing to drop out of the process.

Kris: On the specifics of "name", "stack", and "message", I note that there a bunch of properties not on that like "cause", "code". Those are in-band signals that could be generalized to be language-neutral but we are choosing not to. I think "name" does impose a burden on other implementers because the names are very limited. Mark, you are asking for not only a carve-out for "name" but for a specific "name" set.

MarkM: No, I didn't propose that because <explanation of JS-specific reason why that Dave missed the details of>
  
  Note from Baldur: The explaination is that the commssystem, in EndoJs, would register with itself a subclass of Error any error.name itself doesnt recognize.
  
Kris: I want to point out that there is an alternative view that these specific names, it would not be terribly onerous for us to use registered symbols for these names so it would round trip gracefully for other languages that happened to surface the same names.
  
MarkM: Whenever I do these Hilbert hotel namespace shuffling it is always much more painful than I expect going in and it is a tremendous cognitive burder to keep track of which namespace this name is in. What you're saying is possible, and it's an empirical question, you only know how it goes once you do the engineering.  How do you avoid subclass creation on the fly? What lets you skip it?
  
Kris: There is a gap in my vision, in that all JS errors are presumed to be passable which includes a bunch of errors that won't round trip into the same error class if the name is not communicated on the wire.
  
MarkM: An error needs to come back as an instance of the same error class.
  
Kris: That imposes upon every implementation to track the class of errors regardless if that language has classes.
  
MarkM: There are trade-offs and there's pain of every side of the trade-off. Sometimes the pain on one side, once we look at it, will be larger than the pain on the other side, but sometimes it won't. We need to be open to making those trade-offs but keeping in mind that Endo has an installed base that we don't have the option to not support.
  
Kris: I'm going to yield to the group to get their impressions on the trade-off.
  
Dave: We are overtime.
  
JAR: I have captured this as a potential starting point for next month.

Mark: Good.
  
JAR: I will put this first but maybe we will advance something else. My thought is this will take up the duration. (#142) So, we will try to hash this out. I hope this will get attention in the mean time. Any objections to adjourning? Thank you to everyone for coming and staying a little late. Adjourned.
