# Attendees

- Christine Lemmer-Webber (Spritely)
- Baldur (independent)
- kumavis (metamask)
- Ridley (Dart implementation)
- Dave Thompson (Spritely)
- Kris Kowal (Agoric)
- Richard Gibson (Agoric)

# Agenda

Issues:

- #261 should be a quick approval
- #255 peer authentication
- #138 message framing
- #11 promise shortening

Left over:

- Should desc:handoff-give's gift-id be a bytearray or integer #258
- Resolver target objects or message operations #236

# Minutes

Kris as scribe, with David as second.

JAR convenes at 12:08 Pacific, 15:08 Eastern.

## Old Business

### 261

JAR: anything to say about this?

Ridley: An implementer might use an auto-increment and that might leak session data. I believe we agreed to switch to using a byte array and this PR makes the spec indicate as such.

JAR: Matches my memory

Ridley: …

JAR: Merge 261 and close 258. Any objections?

### 255

JAR: April meeting, resolver targets, peer authentication, anyone wish to lead?

David: Ridley or Christine could intro.

Ridely: We don’t currently authenticate peers and this is bad. We propose that authenticating peers be written in the spec to be a netlayer concern. How do people feel about autnentication being the responsibility of the netlayer.

JAR: I did not see objections. (Wait a minute…)

Ridley: The netlayer will have to intercept start session. I don’t know whether Kumavis agrees. You will have to pass information and pass up the key info. Implementing it is the right way to go but it is not fun.

Kris: I agree.

JAR: That sounds good.

CW: I agree with this strategy. The interception path is sensible enough.

Kris: I want to clarify that the start-session, as described today, if it becomes a responsibility of the netlayer that this could be wire compatible without changes by saying that the Tor and TCP-testing netlayers do the start-session as specified today. By making the change today we free other netlayers to perform the handshake in other ways, such as encrypted key exchange.


Ridley: Interesting. I will restate because I want to understand. Another netlayer may not need to bother with start-session op.

Kris: Yes.

Ridley: As long as you have the same information, that is theoretically fine.

CW: I think the important thing is that the CapTP layer gets a start session message. The CapTP layer always sees the start-session.

Ridley: That is an implementation detail I think.

CW: A netlayer implementation detail.

Kris: Yes

CW: The important thing is nobody is disagreeing.

Kris: I concur.

JAR: That was the first part?

Ridley: The second part is the start session discussion. Then we get into netlayers might have different mechanisms. I am not proposing one but would like people to think about how we add authentication to the netlayers we already have. We have some done auth on WebSockets but it needs more work. I think that’s a good thing to do at an implementer’s meeting.

David: Yeah. Especially, because we don’t have additional netlayers. Talking at the implementers meeting sounds good.

JAR: Does the implementers group need anything from this meeting to proceed?

David: If we brought a WebSocket netlayer, we would need these details ironed out.

Kris: I agree.

JAR: This issue is handed off to the implementers group until the next meeting.

David: Maybe one action item is to come up with the set of properties that a netlayer needs to satisfy. We have done this with WebSocket. We want to avoid assigning oracle attack. Maybe that would be good for the future.

JAR: How much should we say in the spec?

CW: I linked the meta netlayer doc. It does have the properties of a netlayer and states that they should include and what are considered important, desirable but not strictly necessary. We can be more specific if we want to, like adding things, but I think there’s a start there.

David: Talk about this at the implementers meeting might bring up properties that must, should, &c be taken into account.

CW: *static*

JAR: I think Ridley mentioned already is we should make sure that we record progress on the issue.

Ridley: I made a comment.

JAR: It’s my job to ask what we need to move on. Is there further discussion? Technically or in process? *crickets* Okay. So, that’s 255.

### 138 Message Framing

JAR: I see this was opened by Kris. Does anyone want to introduce this?

Kris: The substance of this issue is that for a message stream in Syrup in particular it is not necessary to have an additional framing layer because parsers can detect the end of a syrup message vs. a message-based protocol. I think that is an undue burden on implementations and a bug farm. I believe we've reached agreement that we should do this but we haven't decided on which protocol. WebSocket wouldn't need to do this as WebSocket does its own framing, but for TCP-testing and Tor we would need to pick something. We could adopt netstring or treat this as sequential syrup bytestrings. They are nearly identical with the exception that sequential Syrup bytestrings does not have a comma between each message.

Christine: I’m not sure what the comma would do.

David: I just wanted to agree that we are in consensus that we should do framing. So, it is a matter of choosing a framing protocol. Kris, when you say sequential syrup byte strings? Do you mean wrapping everything as a Syrup encoded byte string.

Kris: 

David: Parsing Syrup byte strings sounds nice.

Ridley: Does anyone really nead the comma?

Kris: My unders…

Ridely: I think we are in agreement then. I don’t think we need to spend three hours on comma or not to comma.

Baldur: It was meant as a check if you land at an aligned message boundary. Most implementations just throw the byte away.

Kris: So, it’s effectively for error detection, but unnecessary. You will probably detect an error if the next byte isn’t an integer.

JAR: David

David: It sounds like we have consensus on sequential Syrup byte strings as message frames.

Ridley: That is the default for netlayers for which there isn’t an intrinsic message framing. It is great to have this done. I appreciate that.

### Promise Shortening

JAR: I am excited. The issue on promise shortening was opened five years ago. Do we need to wait for Mark?

Ridley: Good question.

Kris: Let's hazard it.

JAR: Okay. Let's have a volunteer to summarize Ridley’s idea.

Ridley: I would like to get a quick input on this idea. I can provide a presentation hear or not here, within twenty minutes.

JAR: This is your March 12th message?

Ridley: I have some slides.

JAR: Can you post the presentation in case Mark wants you to lead the presentation?

Ridley: I have not had a chance to talk about this with Mark since.

JAR: Are you able to present?

Ridley: *Presenting* I put together a few slides to explain this. Most of these are not my ideas. I took Mark’s conversations about how this was solved in E and I took that and made it fit with our current spec. The solution that requires the least number of changes to the specification. To try to talk about one thing at a time. This example scenario was provided by Mark Miller. We have Alice, Bob, and Carol. If Alice calls x() on Bob and gets… *note taker flees*

*Ridely shows the current situation and how it has the potential to reorder messages depending on chaos of timing hand-off.*

*Ridley proposes flush and flush-done messages.*

CW: Do I scan the problem correctly? The challenge is that in an intermediate time, ... that can result in not-FIFO order.

Ridley: The message from bob to carol may arrive in a different order than Alice expects. This flush has to always has to come after this message. ...

David: I love these (sequence) diagrams.

CW: How much additional accounting does this entail?

Ridley: I have not implemented, but the only book keeping it adds, is when you send a message to a forwarded promise. We must send flush only if it is necessary to send flush.

JAR: That’s what I mean by opportunistic. The individual operations are expensive so you want to optimize them out.

Ridley: This is only an issue is when before and after shortening, ... this does add a few round trips. Mark’s opinion is that either we need to... My opinion: we either need a mechanism like this or we need to not do promise shortening. I think promise shortening is worth doing.

CW: I think shortening is worth doing. I know Dean Tribble found another nightmare with four parties. Part of this led me to be convinced me that we should only need FIFO between two parties. I am forgetting everything from E order. I think this is not attempting to do E order. It is attempting to prevent one confusing ordering. We can use an intential await/on for any three party scenario. We also don’t want to confuse users. I think shortening is important to assess whether this is worthwhile. Shortening seems essential and not removable. Within the space of hand-offs, I would want to see how hard it is to implement this in practice.

Baldur: This the four party scenario: Kenton Varda when he was making CapnProto, he had something like embargoing of messages, to prevent out of order handling. And, this reminds me of embargoing. It is similar but less of a message implementation issues. Another thing is you want to make sure that... You can make sure that Bob’s... locator object 0 to have a method that Alice can call to say they are waiting and saw promise shortening. Give me a method call. I will send all of the messages I would have sent before and get a resolver to start using the old p1. ...

JAR: We are at time.

CW: Great job. Even though I don’t have my head around the implementation, I feel I definitely understand the problem. I won’t undrestand the solution until I see it implemented.

David: Can anyone... Baldur, you tried to explain it. I need an explanation of Dean Tribble’s four party issue.

JAR: Is it in the issue? It's at the very top.

David: Ah! I will read that. Thanks.

JAR: Do we need to give guidance to the implementers group? What is the next step?

David: I propose we discuss further at implementation meetings and multiple implementations attempt the solution 

JAR: Can someone loop in Mark?

Kris: Yes

David: I don’t know when we can implement this...

Kris: Are you saying there’s no order guarantee?

David: Yes. Thank you for pointing that out.

JAR: Okay, I’m okay with that action item. I’m watching the chat. It sounds like this may be a good stopping point. Thank you again Ridley for preparing to the agenda. Any objections to adjourning? *crickets* Okay, we’re done!

