# Attendees

Scribe: Christine Lemmer-Webber

- Christine Lemmer-Webber (spritely)
- Baldur (independent)
- David Thompson
- JAR (chair)
- Joshua Corbin
- kumavis
- Kris Kowal
- Mark Miller
- Ridley

# Agenda

Date/time: 2nd Tuesday 19:00 UTC on 12 May 2026
Location: https://bbb.sfconservancy.org/b/chr-pm5-cl8-ctl - test link ahead of time
Scribe: Last time, Kris scribed with David
Previous meeting's minutes:
Draft agenda:

## Issues

- Ridley's work on shortening https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/11
- Mark's handoffs thoughts
- genAI policy https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/268

- potential funding path https://www.sovereign.tech/programs/standards

# Minutes

JAR: Checking on agenda

Christine: Somewhat urgent is the Sovereign Tech Agency's standards fund. We don't have consensus on a standards body, though, and I'm not sure it's feasible. The deadline is in a week.

JAR: Is there any action we can take? We can have a separate meeting if we need.

Christine: We have other urgent items so maybe we can come back to this at the end because I am interested in hearing people's thoughts.  Sounds like we have three things to discuss: gen AI policy, Ridley's work on shortening, and Mark's handoff thoughts.

JAR: I feel like the handoff issue is the oldest topic and it would be comforting to have some closure on that.

MarkM: I am willing to go first if that's what we decide

JAR: How much time should we provide?

MarkM: I could easily take up the entire time, but we should not do that. 20 minutes?

JAR: 20 minutes is fine

MarkM: There are a set of requirements I've always taken to be requirements for targets (called "remoteables" in Endo). Distinct from 3 party handoff of promises. For 3 party handoff of promises, all that we need is promise shortening, and then all we need for promise shortening, and Ridley's is of course 100% relevant to that, and the hard problems I'm going to bring up for handoff of targets. The reason of those hard problems don't appear in handoffs of promises, because promises only need to eventually shorten. The hard case for targets, currently in ocapn I don't think "correctly" (per my understanding of required semantics) which is if Alice has a target reference to Carol, and Alice sends a message to Bob using that target as an argument, that what Peer B has to deliver to Bob when delivering that message is it has to deliver a target reference to carol. And the hard constraint on target references is they have to be canonical, as in if Peer B already has a target reference to Carol, that the target reference that peer B delivers to Bob must be the same or at least testably EQ by local language bindings to satisfy grant matching. The JS binding uses JS reference equality to EQ which provides grant matching equality. The reason this is hard and that ocapn as I understand it does not currently get it right... and this will lead to one more requirement... if Peer B when it receives the message from Alice, it must know whether the give descriptor in the message for the target reference for Carol, it must know on arrival without waiting on a round trip to vat C that the reference is the same as the target reference it already holds. And only if it knows it is not the same as a target reference it already holds that it creates a new reference. What I understand is that the reference as delivered over OCapN assuming no round trip is a promise because you don't know what it refers to until there's a round trip to B. It's certainly opaque to C that this is happening, until C gets a message from both A and B, and prior to that round trip that B does not know and therefore cannot deliver a canonical reference to Bob

Christine: I understand that when Bob is sent a message that refers to Carol, we would want Bob to be able to do work opportunistically and so that Bob would get a promise to Carol

MarkM: E resolved this problem in a particular way, and in our private meeting I realized I wanted to retreat from that. I have a proposal for how we could retreat from it.

MarkM: This would be giving up on wormhole op and E order and doing point to point FIFO. Even given up on that we need an even further retreat. Baldur mentioned swissnums which is the reference to e-order

Christine: To clarify, to see if I understand: Bob is sent what will eventually be a reference to Carol and even in the Agoric video I watched about your design for handoff tables, you said that Bob should be able to immediately be able to perform work, therefore we give a promise to a reference to Carol.

MarkM: That was not my position then, but that is what I am suggesting we retreat to, yes.

Christine: I think what ocapn does is what I just said

MarkM: What I suggest we do is retreat to something similar to what ocapn does

Baldur: As I understand it, the 3 party handoff gift Bob gets before establishing connection to Carol, it's always treated as a promise that can shorten later, but you cannot know at the time that the invocation reaches bob and given gift and know whetehr it's the same reference to the same target he already has

MarkM: That's true about actual E implementation, and it's not true about the design. And what we're talking about comes down to the lost resolution bug, which in E was motivated by E-order, but since no longer suggesting we stick with e-order, but even with retreat to fifo, what we documented in retreating to captp could work with swissnums to canonicalize. If you don't do e-order we can use swissnums, but get something like.... but we get lost resolution bug. But I feel like what I think we can ocapn currently does, the reason I don't believe it's a viable place to retreat to what ocapn currently does, is there's a hard type difference between targets and promises, and the hard type difference is that a target is immediately and locally comparable and can be used as keys in tables, and in particular in Endo which layers on top of tagged something called "copymap" that you can send through protocol as well, and only things that can appear in key position are things which immediately have a stable equality. If they don't have a stable equality, then having them appear in key position of map is very very wrong. So I've always talked about one way to think about the constraints on ocapn is in terms of pass invariance and round tripping. So an implication of the implementation as it stands right now is that if Alice sends a target reference to Bob and Bob sends back to Alice, then it will arrive as a promise on Alice, which violates round tripping, which on round tripping grounds violates our constraints. The pass invariant constraints are to say, if I say that an op is pass invariance, which is a two argument operation, then what it means the op to be pass invariant, if I do op of A B locally and get a result, and I send both A and B to you on another machine, and you do what's received A' and B', and you do op on A' and B' you must get the same result, and that's definitional pass invariance, and what we've done with large set of invariants on top of tagged is we built a whole pattern matching system of patterns and guards on top of tagged such that if I test if a specimen matches a pattern and then I send both specimen and pattern to remote site, they must get the same answer. And have the protocol downgrade to a promise would violate that in ways Endo could not recover from. So this is my thought that downgrading to a promise on passing is not a viable position. What is a viable position... there's two viable alternatives to what ocapn is doing, one is to make semantics stronger, which goes back to something E-like, or to retreat farther into something that does have round tripping. So let me suggest the further retreat which is to prohibit passing targets as arguments. And this makes all of the entire stack of software that Agoric has built incompatible with ocapn which is a terrible price, which is to say that any argument is rejected on sending side and if it's a copy structure that the leaves of the copy structure may not contain a target, that's rejected. And thus if you want to send a copy map which has keys which contain targets, that would be rejected as well. So that would mean sending copy structure that contains leaves, send a promise now and have fulfillment of structure be copy structure be actual structure you want to see. Which means Bob can proceed if he wants to benefitting from FIFO constraints, or he can fulfill until when (?) by delaying his action he's opting out of benefitting from FIFO. Take me out of FIFO order in terms of when I react to message, so that I can postpone until I actually receive those arguments that are received. And Endo's patern and guard system has a particular guard system which is basically the syntactic sugar to make it very easy for Bob to express the second one, the postpone me until things resolve, opting out of ordered delivery, as talking this through I realize most of Agoric could make that fairly painlessly, the difficulty is identifying for Agoric stack where we are relying on doing FIFO order. In those cases the known conflict is that the ERTP deposit message, going back to the grant matcher, in the matchmaker, if I do a deposit, if I send a deposit message and then a withdrawl message on the same message, the success or failure of the withdraw message should be able to depend on the withdraw message only being processed if the deposit had already been processed. If the deposit has a reference, in the case of this retreat, and in case of what ocapn does now, you could not do deposit in order, so immediately withdrawing from purse

MarkM: In order to not retreat and move forward to something more e-like but without e-order, you drop the need for wormhole op, but in order to deliver targets which must be canonical on reception, you must introduce the swissnum system that E had or something similar. And that would enable compatibility with all the assumptions mintmaker makes and etc.

Christine: By adding swissnums it does make it so we can't operate in environments that can't hold secrets. We couldn't do quorums.

MarkM: Very good point

JAR: Questions for Mark?

Baldur: With swisshashes not swissnums we could just know if same and not give out any Power of Bits

MarkM: in E we had a 3 level hash chart, actual number which has required number of entropy is swissBase, we do a deterministic hash, ie a hash with no seed of swissbase to get swissnum, and then do deterministic hash again with no seed on swissnum to get the swisshash. And protocol for handoff in E for canonicalization is we only send swisshash, and this is invented by hashchains and not by us, is counting on one way nature of a hash. Given a hash, you still have no increased ability to hash a swissnum which was hashed to get the swisshash. So this is supposed to be canonical for a message that does not require delivering a message. And whether that can work in a system that does not use swissnums

Dave: I think this would be good for an implementers meeting, having trouble following, would be good to have diagrams

MarkM: in absence of 3 party handoff of targets, the only handoff we have is for promise shortening, which is extension of promise chain, and all further handoffs only in service of shortening

Christine: I think there is a challenge in that Ridley has been working a big proposal to change the current system. Mark, I think you said that your proposal wouldn't be incompatible with Ridley's current direction?


MarkM: I'm saying that but something a bit stronger, what Ridley's working on I'm saying would become the only handoff system

Christine: I'd like to know what Ridley thinks.

Ridley: I think overall I understand Mark's arguments here, I have to decide if I agree with the direction, I'm happy if someone wants to meet and explain my perspective on this stuff. I think I agree with what Mark said in that if what we were to adopt Mark's proposal, that wouldn't change my current proposal. It would just be that my current proposal is used more.

MarkM: Correct, we would always be using it for every handoff.

Ridley: I did get a bit of followup, it sounds like Mark and Kumavis had looked at my recent proposal, I don't know what we want to look at it

MarkM: I haven't looked at the most recent version, I'm going off of gist of what most recent version has been going on trajectory wise

Kumavis: I find Ridley's proposal to be very elegant and easy to implement, and I haven't found any issues with it yet. I do think it deserves maybe a draft of spect text

JAR: Does it need review? Is there any risk of conflict?

Christine: I propose that we make Ridley's proposal the topic for next implementers meeting, and then Mark's suggestion, which depends on Ridley's, as meeting after next. And so that's homework for MarkM and I for next meeting.

MarkM: Good.

Christine: In which case I think we've made as much progress as we can on first two agenda ordering

JAR: Okay, well the meeting is to serve the people working here. What should we do next?

Christine: I'd like to discuss the gen AI policy that I filed an issue for today, if that's okay.

JAR: Sure, I've been wondering about that myself.

Christine: Why don't I just walk through the proposal and rationale. The proposal is basically I think that OCapN is TCB-level work on the protocol level, so we have to have very strong understanding of things submitted and there are unsettled issues around copyright in the US and around the world. Maybe Dave can explain the motivation later, but my proposal is that we don't have any AI generated spec text, tests, or other code contributions, and that includes issue and pull request. I don't want to prohibit people doing security audits with AI text, but they have to understand things and when the file an issue or PR it has to be their own work. AI tends to create cognitive debt, and this group has historically had strong understanding of the topics being discussed. This doesn't prohibit implementers from using AI. This proposal is just to continue working the way we have been, before these tools became popular.

JAR: This doesn't sound too hard. It would take some work to come up with a scenario where this would be a hindrance, and I don't want to do that work.

Christine: Also, it sounds like no one is objecting but this became more significant since we recently received a PR that is in the category that we'd call "slop". As Dave said in the issue, it would be nice to be able to reject these things quickly so we aren't wasting time. Dave said he went down a rabbit hole where there was a Zig implementation of Syrup that actually has Spritely's Pumpkin Chat objects defined with CapTP primitives, so I think we can just reject these sorts of things quickly.

Kris: I have mixed feelings. I've been making extensive use of generative AI this year, mostly because, knowing that this issue is complicated, I've been using it on the basis that our work is not adequately funded. The amount of time we have to move, especially in implementation land, is very very short, in which to get our work to market available. What we have here hasn't moved quickly enough. But on the flip side I also feel very strongly about professional responsibility, and feel it's true working with generative AI is, especially in seductive initial side, there is a tendency to erode initial responsibility. However it is useful, I think that my feeling on this is that sloppy code / PRs are bad and we should feel no compunction at all about rejecting work that is sloppy and I consider it a professional responsibility when weilding generative AI to use it well enough that the artifacts you're creating are not obviously sloppy or an AI.

Christine: I think you may have come in a bit late, I'm not sure, but it was explicitly said that this would not affect implementations, just issues, spec text, and the test suite.

Kris: I understand that. I'm saying that a prohibition on any material that generative AI was used will genuinely reduce my ability to participate. That is framed as an opportunity cost. My time is very stretched. When I engage with this project, I intend to draft with AI assistance and that you won't be able to tell when I submit something. We could have a policy that you can't write sloppy text/code. I think it's a fundamental piece of etiquette that a bot should never impersonate an actual person.

JAR: My compromise idea is disclosure statements. If you do use it, you have to say what you used and how.

Christine: I think disclosure statements and insufficient. It doesn't address copyright concerns. Reviewing is more work in this group than authoring, so I don't think the generative side is where our bottleneck lies. Ridley has done a bunch of work on promise shortening, but it has taken much longer for the rest of us to review and get up to speed. Given that there are other concerns like copyright, I lean on prohibition.

Kris: My lived experience working with generative AI, it's correct that the bottleneck is review. generative AI increases the intensity of that statement and I now spend all of my time in review.

MarkM: I object to prohibition. In the short term, what Kris and Jonathan have stated that there be a human author that takes full responsibility for the quality.  "This partially AI generated thing, I speak for it and endorse it and carry all the reputation risk". The reason for disclosure is not that you need to make sure of quality, but more of a flag to know what to worry about when reviewing, as we learn about the differences between human mistakes and AI mistakes. Longer term, I think at some point we would have AI participants as full peer in this group and it wouldn't make sense to prohibit them. The AGI assumption is that they'd be just as competent as us so there's no reason for prohibition.

Ridley: I don't agree with that assertion, I think planning as if that's the most likely scenario... I think planning with that assertion, that AGI is going to be a full participant in this group and we'll be happy to have it

MarkM: I don't think any of us know it

JAR: We can change our policy as a group

MarkM: I agree with that, just that there shouldn't be a permeanent prohibition

JAR: I suggest we wrap up. I've been late on getting agenda started, I'll try to maybe get the agenda together next time, but would appreciate filing issues pref a couple of days or weeks beforehand

Dave: This is just a question I think will have an easy question about, regarding OCapN PR that's irrelevant, I don't have write access to repo, does someone who does close it

Christine: I'm willing to close

JAR: Any objections?

(No response)

JAR: No objections to that or adjourning, bye!

